By: Botsang Moiloa The flawed unjust system that favours the rich, the corrupt or politically connected made is super possible for a corruption, money laundering suspect to safely fly out of the Republic of Corruption into his Homeland. Imagine a person charged or suspected international money laundering, his net assets “estimated” at hundreds of millions of dollars, suspected of fraud, has been found in possession of various undeclared passports including his Home Country Diplomatic passport and has lied to the investigative, prosecuting and judicial authorities about his background, documents, citicizenship, travel, and assets yet a member of the Judiciary, WHO HAPPENS TO BE ONE OF THE ACUSSED WORSHIPERS AND FOLLOWER, decides to grant such a clear fugitive bail or a mere R200 000. Now before I leave it here regarding compromised system, let me remind everyone that in a normal country or society such a case would have never been heard or precided over by a mere junior magistrate whose conscience did not tell her to rescuse herself as her Major 1 Prophet was in the dock and she was clearly conflicted. None of the security or intelligence, maybe even prosecuting personnel could also detect and/or check the background and possible breaches of the Investigating, Prosecuting and Presiding Officials. How Bizzare! But maybe the Presiding Official was asked not to go anywhere and see to it that the Major 1 and his Virgin to Crime Mary are set Free while other hands of the Gov will see to it that they receive a safe passage to Lilongwe! 2) By the way the RSA is on level 1 Lockdown and nobody dared to care what level of Lockdown is Malawi. Ehhhhhh International travel restrictions are in place and stringent measures are there. Wait wait wait, how did the Presidential advance Team Travel to SA and via which route and Airline? Oooops on which day did they travel to the RSA? Do we have any flights between Lilongwe and Or Tambo International Airport and on their Departure why was it necessary for the Malawian Chartered Presidential Jet had to fly via ORTIA? These are some of the basic questions I would ask before I even invoke my 13 years of Diplomatic Service Experience and 10 years of Border Management Experience. But this is not about me knowing or claiming to be experienced, so let us leave it here and focus on The Prophet that indeed has proved that he has powers beyond reproach… 3) I must say, I have been a Diplomat for 13 years on Consular and Administrative services. I have over 10 years of Border Management Services and Interventions which exposed me to Land, Sea and Air Ports of Entry. My personal view and/or opinion is that the Malawian State visit during Covid-19 Lockdown was kept a secret, there are no commercial flights between Malawi and SA since borders were opened, so how did the advance team come? As a matter of fact, it never happens that advance teams come or depart with the Head of State. Never ever! Then why would we call them advance teams? I have personally handled over 20 State Visits or Transits of at least 4 Heads of State, and what we are told is utter nonsense. 4) But the most important security feature I pick is, why would a Presidential Jet leave Waterkloof Airport Base to OR Tambo Commercial Airport to sort out administrative issues of administrators? Doesn’t Malawi have a Diplomatic Mission in the RSA which would have been tasked to ensure the safe and seamless transit or travel of their First Citizen’s Team? A road distance from Waterkloof Aiforce Base to ORTIA is less-than 25min car drive and exactly 32kms. Why didn’t they drive to ORTIA or administrators move from their Hotels to Waterkloof if they had to get assistance from the HoS. Imagine the Office of the President or The President himself getting out of his way to help those who are suppose to help him with consular and administrative work. A good humble and down to the ground Malawian have in their Leader. I salute! A decoy of note. We have to be honest, Bushiri funds Malawian Government and that is why his real Head of State will break all Lockdown regulations and Covid-19 risks to come release, aid, steal and or make a safe passage for his Prime Minister or should I say International Finance Minister. I still have to see what Programme did the two Heads of State had. Which Diplomatic and Working notes were exchanged by them or by which Ministers. Or was it just a Ti Te Ta, hug and bye? Let me hammer the final nail into these lies, banking on SADC Protocol on Immunities or Extraditions is a farce as the SADC protocol is not binding Treaty. There is nothing that the SADC or SA can do if Malwi shows us a middle finger. We have done it to the ICC as SA with The Hounourable President AL Bashir. So fellow South Africans stop worrying about Bushiri and go drink and party as you do that best and remain landless. You thought Guptas were corrupt, wait and watch. The real state capture is happening right under your noses. Whites and Foreign nationals are showing that you have no Government of your own, no rules, no country, and no backbones. Let us drink and dance maaan. Bushiri funds the Gov of Malawi and you expect them to extradite him without conditions of honour? If a Head of State can undertake a State Visit physical trip during Covid-19, then you will understand how powerful Bushiri is and how lame and captured SA is. Corruption in SA is not State Capture but just one of the enablers. There is more politicking to this than any other thing and money makes the world go round. Thanks to the SAs 6th Administration for securing a safe trip for Major 1 out of SA. At least this time it was for another Afrikan man. The above is written by Botsang Modimowame Moiloa in his personal capacity as an Independent Political Analyst and Social Commentator. It does NOT reflect any position of the Professional and Political organizations he serves or belong to. Neither does it reflect the position of the Government of the RSA. It is his personal and own views based on experience and analysis. AS WE AWAIT THE TRUTH.