By: Independent Media (Cape Times) Cape Town – A team of top Western Cape police detectives has been assembled to probe a complaint of intimidation by Executive Chairperson of Sekunjalo Investment Holdings and Independent Media Dr Iqbal Survé. This after he received a text message in the early hours of the morning last month. The message alerted him that someone had been sent to tamper with his vehicle’s brakes. Hours later when he read the message, Survé sent his driver to go and check the vehicle, which was securely parked behind locked gates. Unusually, the vehicle was found unlocked. When the driver looked inside, he noticed a thick white substance smeared on the driver’s headrest. The driver (whose name is being withheld) was advised to take a shower and to contact Survé immediately if he had any headaches or difficulty breathing. In the weeks preceding the incident, Survé said he had received several calls and messages indicating that there could be attempts on his life. The message alerted him that someone had been sent to tamper with his vehicle’s brakes. Hours later when he read the message, Survé sent his driver to go and check the vehicle, which was securely parked behind locked gates. Unusually, the vehicle was found unlocked. When the driver looked inside, he noticed a thick white substance smeared on the driver’s headrest. The driver (whose name is being withheld) was advised to take a shower and to contact Survé immediately if he had any headaches or difficulty breathing. In the weeks preceding the incident, Survé said he had received several calls and messages indicating that there could be attempts on his life. He said all the information relating to the above was handed over to the police. Soon after acquiring Independent Media, Survé had a narrow escape when an armed man approached his vehicle outside a local restaurant. The man had been in one of two cars following him. He said he had just got out of the vehicle when the man approached him with a firearm in his hand. Survé managed to escape inside the restaurant. This matter was also reported to the authorities, he said. “In our young democracy where media freedom is important, it is really sad and a huge concern that one has to be subjected to such intimidation. “It is an invasion of one’s privacy and is an attempt to stop one from supporting and uncovering the truth and a balanced narrative to the country,” said Survé. The businessman has been the target of a sustained campaign to smear his name, including negative and false articles by rival media groups. “What is at stake here, all roads lead towards shutting Independent or shutting any alternative voice,” he said. 