By: Hadebe Hadebe The world economy is based on a simple notion that says, “If it can’t be grown, it has to be mined!” This saying helps to understand the extractive nature of African economies and their primary relevance in global supply chains. Africa appears on the world map for its natural resources and agriculture. Therefore, it is not in the interest of the world to see development and progress on the continent. Even the political instability, corruption and poverty are a function of careful planning. Taking from this, I have always maintained that the reason England gave independence to Boers instead of blacks was not a mistake. Thus, apartheid was by design and a ‘crime against humanity’ as it sought to keep the black majority in abeyance. South Africa has and will always be a jewel for the British crown. This therefore means that black people couldn’t be trusted with controlling the world economy. The world still operated in a gold standard in the 1960s. This only changed in the 1970s when gold was dumped and replaced with the US dollar, as both a store of value and unit for trade. However, it is not only gold that is found in South Africa and the southern African region. Some of the world’s richest deposits of mineral resources are in this part of the globe. South Africa and the DRC rank among the top wealthiest nations in terms of mineral deposits. The Bushveld Complex, spreading across the Limpopo, Mpumalanga, North-West and Gauteng provinces, is said to be “the most valuable mineral province on earth.” It is home to a huge range of rare metals essential for the manufacture of all information technology such as phones, computers and other commercial and military communication hardware. Political and social instability is an inverse of economic stability, but without political instability there is no economic development. Simply put, the wealthy countries are nothing without conflict in Africa. Paraphrasing the Russian ruler Nicholas I, Africa must remain the ‘sick man of the world’, thanks to its leaders and their handlers abroad. Independence from European powers has meant nothing much to an ordinary Africa as plunder of resources to support the global economy continues. Africa remains private property of global powers who use it to extract minerals. Sophisticated economic systems and financial models are nothing but a facade to hide the true nature of world economy. Unfortunately, on the bottom of the rung lies the dark continent with its glittering minerals which are there for the taking by everyone except its people. Top nations like China, Germany, Italy, Japan, South Korea, France and the United States do not want to lose their industrial and manufacturing positions. However and with fewer exceptions, these countries are not blessed with a lot of minerals so they look abroad for solutions. Hence, the so-called investments in economic language are form of take over or control of resources for their selfish ends. Almost all top capital goods and gadgets are produced in these countries. Large corporations such as General Electric, Huawei, Hitachi, Hyundai, etc. are thirsty for minerals, otherwise they will lose their market positions without abundant supplies. And their governments stand up for them by pillaging Africa. In addition to the old, classical but strategic minerals such as uranium, copper, iron ore and silver South Africa mines precious metals like platinum and rare earths. In fact, South Africa and Zimbabwe respectively hold 90 percent and 10 percent of the known reserves of platinum in the world. Platinum belongs to a minerals called platinum group metals (or PGMs) together with palladium, osmium, palladium and ruthenium. Platinum and related minerals are used to manufacture catalytic converters and are important for other industrial and medical applications. What this means is that the global manufacturing of cars in particular is nothing without the likes of platinum. The prolonged strike in 2012 which affected the platinum sector and also resulted in the gruesome murder of workers in Marikana should be understood in this context. Perhaps this explains why many people around the world would want this incident to be forgotten as it came. The carnage links directly to the importance of global supply chains in the world economy. Without minerals such as platinum, lithium and manganese, which are found South Africa and Zimbabwe in abundance, the world’s climate change agenda would be in serious tatters. What is almost baffling is that resource-rich countries confuse the surge in mining investment as a ordinary business transactions, and often announce these as an achievement. Many people use that the high growth after 1994 as an outcome of good economic policies. Marius Strydom asked, “Did you know Thabo Mbeki presided over SA’s highest economic growth rate in the past 35 years?”. Yes he did but this tells nothing about what was the real reason behind this and why it actually meant a disaster not just for South Africa but other resource producing nations as well. The late 1990s to mid-2000s represented the unprecedented rise of China which was a de-facto manufacturing hub of the world. All multinational corporations and countries used China as their factory to produce goods that were in turn exported to all parts of the world. Minerals were behind this manufacturing boom, which stimulated demand for commodities. That is basically how the average 4.1% growth under Mbeki was achieved. The downside to this was this growth never really much to South Africa in a strictest sense. There were fewer jobs were created. Industrial capacity declined significantly as production moved abroad. Beneficiation of minerals didn’t take off as exports were prioritized. The surplus in the fiscus did not manifest in massive investments in the economy as proven by problems at Eskom and rapidly deteriorating infrastructure at all levels. Economic booms should yield prosperity for the country and its citizens. Nonetheless, global mineral consumers have over the years devised a number of strategies to secure steady supplies of minerals for their industries. Firstly, the pricing mechanisms for minerals are designed to pass the benefit from minerals to developed countries and leaving the producers poorer and squabbling among themselves for attention. As with the British-owned Mining Indaba, many African countries in Canada this week to “attract investments”, another phrase to signify their willingness to be exploited to no end. Secondly, mineral trading takes place in London and New York. No trade happens in Zambia (copper), Zimbabwe/ South Africa (platinum or coal), Botswana/ South Africa (diamonds and precious stones), etc. The only economic report about these countries concerns the ineptitude manner in which they are managed. But no one cares to explain why this is the case. A dysfunctional Zimbabwe is not only advantageous for looting local elites but also international companies cherish every minute as that country’s problems mount. If trading was so transparent, where do we fit practices like global illicit flows and related processes such as base-shifting and transfer pricing? Truth is, illicit flows are neither criminal nor incidental because they are devised by developed countries to freely loot minerals from poorer states. In South Africa, it is a crime to hold unprocessed gold or platinum but in Europe it is not. This means individuals steal billions-worth of raw materials and take them to Paris, Zurich and Frankfurt in suitcases. In fact, there is a strong global value chain of corruption involving local agents, financial institutions, transnational criminal syndicates, trading companies and consumer countries to support looting activities in resource-rich states Thirdly, the European Union, amongst others, has put together programmes like REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and restriction of Chemicals), RoHS (Restriction of Hazardous Substances) and the Raw Materials Initiative (RMI) to source raw materials from the different parts of the world. The European embassies in Pretoria, Harare or Dakar are not there to play marbles unlike many African diplomatic missions in the developed world. The role of European diplomats is to ensure that resource producing countries do not misbehave and prevent their countries from having unfettered access to minerals. It is for this reason such things as beneficiation of minerals is not permissible. Such industrial policies will ordinarily first create more scarcity for important (industrial) minerals and will result in more competition for European companies in general. For example, the REACH policy of the EU forbids imports of processed minerals. America’s Dodd-Frank Act looks at minerals coming from countries in conflict, the very same conflict they sponsor. With all these ‘good-hearted’ policies mining in the DRC continues as usual and militias in the Sahel receive billions of dollars from their illicit trade of minerals to the developed world. Fourthly, developed countries and corporations utilize mineral hoarding or stockpiling as a hedging strategy just in case certain countries started to ‘misbehave’ like platinum workers did in the North West. This strategy is useful to cause commodity prices to plummet and thus enabling these countries to source whichever resource very cheap, or to punish delinquents as it happened with left-wing governments in Latin America. What is strange is that developed nations complain bitterly when developing countries use exports tariffs “as a way of keeping raw materials for domestic use.” MPRDA amendments in South Africa were fiercely opposed in fear that the then-mines minister Mosebenzi Zwane was threatening global supplies. To this day, those amendments to the mining law have not seen the light of day. What followed were downgrades of the South Africa to junk status as a warning to never again fiddle with mineral supplies. The likes of the EU resort to protectionist measures to protect their markets but this is not seen as a problem. Even locally, Amplats in 2012 was accused of mineral hoarding. Its CEO at the time, Chris Griffith, responded that this was a measure to protect the company against strikes. In this regard, the company downsized its workforce and continued sending platinum abroad when the prices were very low. Many companies around the world have been blamed for holding largest private stockpile of minerals. The World Trade Organisation (WTO) is the playground where these wars are fought. Developed countries are quick to report any country to the WTO, which doesn’t hesitate to rule against anyone frustrating ‘free trade’ of minerals. Now that South Africa produces key input minerals for technologies that prop the nonsensical fourth industrial revolution (4IR) agenda including platinum, rare-earth minerals (REE), etc., it doesn’t take a genius to see that once again the world economy is in the hands of the unreliable black race. Demands for more access to the economy and land reform as well as ailing SOEs are used to prove this point. For example, the United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s criticism of the land reform effort is a sign of better things come. Land bears the minerals that world fancies. Any country that stands in the way, its economy will be decimated. South Africa’s problems are a consequence of world economics.