By: Clyde Ramalaine Former Brownsville Herald reporter, Laura Tillman in her book ‘The Long Shadow of Small Ghosts’ told us, “It’s impossible to make a judgment as to which perceptions are real, and which are false, without assuming your personal view to be more valid than your neighbor’s.” I thought of this when I heard President Ramaphosa speak in his most recent Editors Forum address. Ramaphosa appeared forced to venture a personal opinion on his leadership in the face of nagging questions raised by increasing groups of people in South Africa. While in the southland of Mzansi there is no official contest for a presidency of the ANC what can’t be denied is a confirmed and growing vacuum in leadership that teeters on the crisis. I hear you retort these are mere perceptions look at the approval ratings of Ramaphosa according to some polls. While that may be the case or not [we know how polls become useful tools to a political end] we understand that the constituency that from the start pinned their hopes on Ramaphosa are essentially made up of those who are outside the ANC. Ramaphosa’s leadership is under severe scrutiny not just from those of us who from the start were public in our lack of confidence in his anticipated leadership but even from those who echoed the fallacy and farce of a Mandela second coming, selfies on brisk walks along beach strips, broad smiles in the claim of a ‘New Dawn’ and ‘Thuma-Mina’ failed campaigns. His leadership comes under scrutiny on three critical areas, basic delivery, content for economic redress/ job creation and policy decisiveness besides an ANC unity index. It is three years since Ramaphosa delivered his first State of the Nation address dated February 2018. Thirty-six months of his leadership marks more than sufficient and fair a period to assess as delivering on the cross theme realities of a South African society. Let us at first appreciate that Ramaphosa’s narrow victory in Nasrec had him from the start in a peg hole. The now comfortably accepted ‘bought elections’ unfortunately for him did not produce a mild watered-down set of resolutions mandate that would have given a leader in the ilk of Ramaphosa much more space to play around the theatrics of change as driven by the good-guy public relations diplomacy. Meaning he won the elections by a very slim margin despite all the money and owes it a last-minute known betrayal of his current deputy David D. Mabuza to the then NDZ 17 campaign. Ramaphosa, therefore, was elected on what many consider as an explicit radical policy mandate when his intentions never were to be this radical or to mellow the ANC since his predecessor in the second term of his tenure as ANC president heeded the call of the masses for radical changes to the economy and land redress issues. He decided to hang his entire presidency in over-reliance on yet to be validated state capture crimes. Virtually every major speech of Ramaphosa includes his favourite crutch of state capture. It is as if Ramaphosa assumes his daily references to state capture will make it a truth. I am on record to have said Ramaphosa never really was interested to lead the ANC, the ANC is a very complex entity for its contradictory identities of interest present in it, hence its claim of being a broad church. It was a personal aim to become president of SA, it didn’t matter what party, moment or structure would be the vehicle to carry him into the lush gardens of Tuynhuis. To corroborate this view, we are reminded of Anthony Butler’s biography on Ramaphosa that refers to how latter would joke with Henry Dolowitz, owner of the legal practice where he served as an articled clerk and say ‘when I am President, … you will be made Minister of white affairs’. Butler asks us as readers to observe the ambition of Ramaphosa though concealed in jest. To his defence, there is absolutely nothing wrong to have a public ambition for such a pristine powerful position we know many share similar dreams. Perhaps what is important is to appreciate at this time Ramaphosa belonged to no liberation movement or political party. While the case can be made it didn’t matter on what political ticket or group that dream was going to be realised. Shall we forget how Ramaphosa during October of 2017, in the heat of a very tight ANC presidential race made history, when he went public on his preferred slate, those he referred to in typical boardroom talk of his “Dream – Team”? We now can appreciate that when in 2020 he defends his leadership as not a weak president and uses his business success as a leader as a justification, it is from the bedrock of a misconception and misreading of what ANC politics and SA politics and the masses are all about. Shall we jog our collective memories, Ramaphosa’s callous deviation of ANC adopted stance on RET in preference of what his CR17 campaign defined as “inclusive growth” was another factor that would show him as distant to ANC policy articulations of radical economic transformation? While he in government sense appear to have won the battle with the claim of an inclusive growth economy if we consider the recently tabled economic plan by his finance minister Tito Mboweni, the war on RET implementation is far from dissipating. And may just become a very crucial aspect for the upcoming National General Council (NGC) scheduled for June 2020. Those who condemn the Ramaphosa led government’s choices for an economic plan are increasingly becoming more and span organized labour, tripartite partners who feel slighted for how the Ramaphosa government implement what they deem liberal solutions that they were not canvassed on. It didn’t help when his preferred ‘Dream-Team’ was never endorsed but a mix of ANC leadership meaning he would have to live with a Secretary-General as anchorman for his ANC presidency that was not on his dream team slate. It didn’t help that the SG elected was Ace Magashule. For the entire period of his presidency of the ANC, he finds himself square-pegged between resolutions he never was comfortable with and having a Secretary-General who is jealously guarding the resolutions of 54th Conference. The deck was stacked and the internal control of the ANC would never be Ramaphosa’s. When we in 2020 hear a president leading his public relations campaign in frames of “I am not a weak president…” we know this has to be a concession that he is failing to lead or perceived to be floundering in critical spaces. Ramaphosa’s problems are manifold he was promoted as the messiah of economic rescue – the same ones today issue him a scorecard of dismal failure since SA is in a technical recession, growth was scaled down to a paltry 0.075 %. The rand today hit 17 to the USA dollar. He is now emerging as the president that has seen over the shorter period a higher percentage of job losses as FV Leader Groenewald reminded him in the 2020 SONA debate. On the ANC unity front, Ramaphosa has equally failed because the lines remain drawn and there has been reconfiguration and alignment of the balance of forces that glaringly does not favour him. He at organisational level remains accused hitherto as lacking any commitment to see the resolutions of the 54th Conference implemented. It appears almost strange that three years on Ramaphosa still has to keep one eye on his ailing predecessor whose support protests a reconfigured political space in what is considered ANC-RET lobby groups that now publicly advocate for the upholding and implementation of ANC 54th Conference resolutions and policies. Ramaphosa, therefore, is aware that this by itself spells a threat for his leadership and makes him appear weak. One would not be surprised if he is considering to make overtures on this score, albeit again in self-survival to quell the rising dissatisfaction with his leadership as the epicentre. Ramaphosa remains caught up in a legal brawl borne from personal expediency to answer a question from the then DA leader Maimane on Bosasa monies paid to his son Andile. Ramaphosa is now considered one hard at work to sacrifice the Chapter nine institution and its incumbent leader Advocate Mkhwebane in what is perceived, all to defend the donors of his billionaire campaign. There is little doubt that Ramaphosa is at pains to keep South Africa in the dark on who contributed the over R1bn that made him an ANC president in December 2017. This action by itself does not inspire any confidence in his leadership as one who claims to works for transparency. The SARS incessant refusal to make public former President Jacob Zuma’s tax affairs as requested by the Public Protector and endorsed by Zuma, will by all standards set a precedent that will enable the call for Ramaphosa and others to have to disclose their tax affairs. On the governance level, Ramaphosa is also exposed since his cargo-diplomacy of foreign investors standing ready to lump money in a SA economy essentially based on the sentiment of him be remains a pipe-dream. Davos his hope and envoys (buddies he needed to repay with income-earning opportunities) he dispatched has hitherto despite two investment conferences failed to show SA where the money is banked that came as a result of their intervention. The most pressing issue of unemployment generally at 29,6% and over 49% specifically for youth necessitates innovative means for job creation is another confirmation SA depicts a bleak picture and its political leadership does not inspire any hope for betterment in the near and foreseeable future. crisis in bleak political leadership. The ongoing Eskom crisis with confirmed forecasts of a minimum of 18 more months of perpetual load-shedding does not inspire any confidence in his leadership. Apart from the energy crisis, the emerging truth on what is currently happening at Eskom, with a daily cost of R93million and R46million for maintenance and the Ramaphosa leadership endorses controversial REIPP’s (Renewable Energy Independent Power Producers). These follow Ramaphosa as wet diapers wherever he finds himself. If the aforementioned are automatically reduced to pure hater-talk, he must also contend with the fact that his supporters are increasingly public that he is weak and cannot deal with either internal ANC power politics to stamp his authority or act against the so-called truant and guilty ones on the state capture crimes. Peter Bruce a who prognosticated how good a Ramaphosa leadership will be for SA, in this season defines Ramaphosa’s indecision as incurable and final. AS if that is not all, he is a president that appears to have picked a fight with arguably the strongest female contender for presidential office, Lindiwe Sisulu. The public animosity and irritation of an eroded relationship are palpable and this renders him weak since he cannot remotely consider the offload of his deputy David Mabuza, his Finance Minister Tito Mboweni or his Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Minister Sisulu. Despite competing constituencies calling for their respective proverbial heads for diverse political reasons who have clearly shown him, they have minds of their own. Increasingly louder questions are asked of what to do with the non-starter Ramaphosa presidency? It is an open secret that Ramaphosa is struggling to convince even his supporters because in his most recent editors forum address he was compelled to defend himself with the following words: ” I am not a weak president…” ramaphosa was at pains to defend his assertion about himself as having led many successful businesses employing the same leadership style. If this is not clear evidence that Ramaphosa’s spin doctors have left him now to defend himself which should tell all how much political capital he had expanded. Perhaps the challenge lays right here, Ramaphosa’s stark misplacing of running a private business as a BEE empowered businessman. We must not forget or pretend how Ramaphosa became a business ” success ” story. It had very little to do with his acumen but loads of white business appointing him on their companies to buy him off for this epoch. We therefore at a clinical level can ask questions if Ramaphosa is a business success defined in classical entrepreneurship or if his wealth is an accident of the BEE pollution history. Unfortunately for President Ramaphosa, perception is a reality and no amount of tone-deafness or self-psychology, public relations campaigning will alter that he is trying too hard to convince himself he is not weak when the masses of South Africans feel his weakness in every sphere that defines his meaningful life under his leadership. Editor at Large, Jovial Rantoa recently lamented that, with the following words, ‘while the president is entitled to fully believe in his style of leadership and is convinced that he is doing well, he will be well advised to heed to cries of those who are pleading for some tangible evidence – big or small that – to prove that change is indeed happening.’ In conclusion, maybe President Ramaphosa must appreciate he presides over gravely diminished political capital to assume a mere statement on his part will alter perceptions and lived experiences of the South African society. Mr President you not doing a good job of convincing yourself that you are not a weak president when we know otherwise. Your colossal failures in critical spaces that define meaningful life understood in a society that has been waiting, confirms a coagulum of weak leadership. If I may lean again on Tillman, maybe the president is trying too hard to assume his views [of his] are more valid than that of then South Africa, with this I mean those who sang his praise, others who gave him a chance and some of us who anticipated our current reality should the ANC entrust its leadership to him.   