By: Staff Reporter The ANC Women’s League has come out guns blazing in defence of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, who they say is a victim of an orchestrated political campaign aimed at eliminating women from positions of power. In a statement the league said “there has never been a time in the annals of South Africa when women have been subjected to so much strain, harm and abuse in all fronts.  At the home front they are on the receiving end with a growing number of spousal abuse cases reported daily. This matter is so severe such that it featured in the parliamentary debate held recently during President Cyril Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation Address. Parliamentarians from all parties publicly argued against the this scrounge with the president taking the lead”, said Dlamini. “Of late a new campaign has been unleashed on one rising woman leader, Lindiwe Nonceba Sisulu. The daughter of Walter and Nontsikelelo face the wrath of dagger cloaked blood-thirsty comrades. She did not have a choice to join the ANC.” The ANCWL said it was Sisulu’s parents who made the decision that she and her siblings had no option but to join the ANC because the apartheid regime hounded then too like they did with Zenani and Zindzi Mandela, daughters of Nelson and Winnie Mandela. “Sisulu’s conditions made her understand the norms and values of the ANC and what the ANC stands for – that one must never compromise the ANC for personal gain and interest. She understands the basics of the ANC from the home front to international
solidarity.” The ANCWL said Sisulu of late, “finds herself just like Winnie Madikizela-Mandela and Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma in the same vortex of recrimination, subterfuge and machinations by those hell-bent on flying the flag of male chauvinism”. “Since she took over the Water, Sanitation and Human Settlement Department, she has been hard at work changing and seeking to fundamentally transforming both sectors. Her entry into these two departments was greeted by the year of draught that severely tested the durability of the South African water infrastructure.” “Sisulu has been hounded by hounds and blood thirsty political hyenas who pursued a singular agenda of soiling her reputation. She was recently accused of having employed senior ANC leaders such as the ANC Women’s League president Bathabile Dlamini, Advocate Menzi Simelane and former Spy boss Mo Shaik among others.” “No sooner had she made these appointments, the campaign against her was intensified. Sisulu’s long successful history in leading among others Human Settlements, Defense, Department of International Relations and Cooperation, Public Administration ministries continues in her new Human Settlements Water and Sanitation portfolio. She was also minister of State Security and for her that was linked to her work in the ANC.” The ANCWL hailed praise on Sisulu who they said had distinguished herself in every assignment of government ministry. “In every deployment, she has proved herself as innovative, principled and ethical in her conduct. Her success story continues in the new portfolio of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation.” “She recently unveiled a far-reaching Water Master Plan which was costed as the long-term panacea to the water crises in South Africa. Such a great feat and visionary leadership failed to receive a laudatory acknowledgment, save incongruous clamouring noises of negativity.” “Because her detractors cannot match her excellent record of performance, they resort to public stunts characterized by propaganda, leaks, gossip, malice and political jealousy. Recently, a memorandum with her as the ultimate recipient en-route to her office was diverted and leaked to the media. This and other ongoing acts clearly confirm an orchestrated political campaign aimed at destroying Sisulu.” The ANCWL said Inasmuch as the ANC had taken a decision to legislate a quota system for all genders in leading public and organizational positions, “the voice of women in decision making still remains muffled and muzzled”. “Leading ANC women such as Madikizela-Mandela were side-lined to the rear role of insignificance.  For all her sacrifices and struggle credentials Madikizela-Mandela became a victim of male chauvinism and macho politics.” “Madikizela-Mandela’s character was severely attacked in public such that she was “doubted” in many cycles owing to repeated one-dimensional media onslaught. Many other women became scared to dare challenge male hegemony since Madikizela-Mandela was made a public example.” The ANCWL said Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma was another classical case “of a victim of politics of male testosterone”. “She is one of the most able, qualified and far experienced women that the ANC has ever produced in recent times. Her ascendency to the political helm at Nasrec was cut short not so much by the betrayal hand of Brutus but by the nefarious designs of men who sat in dark corners and contrived evil plans.” “They vowed that not in their life time will this ANC be led by a woman.  To this end, all means possible were invented and re-invented to push back her imminent rise. Even sworn political foes found common agenda in this plan and they concluded a pact of blood. Both Dlamini-Zuma and Sisulu, intellectuals in their own right, grew up organically within the structures of the movement.” The ANCWL said despite a sustained orchestrated political conspiracy against her, “Sisulu’s detractors cannot match her excellent record of performance. They instead have resorted to public stunts characterized by propaganda, leaks, gossip, malice and political jealousy”. “They will not succeed as Sisulu remains unfazed, unnerved and unperturbed by the stale noises of cowards. The ANCWL recognises and appreciates the role played by comrade Lindiwe Sisulu in the struggle against apartheid and will not remain silent in the midst of a dirty political campaign orchestrated by divisive counter-revolutionary elements.” Concluded the ANCWL: “The ANCWL will spare no effort in ensuring that any hidden forms of exclusion of women from positions of authority and power are eliminated.”