By: Kgoši Maepa The DA (Democratic Alliance) can easily call a meeting almost everyday until the day the NCOP (National Council of Provinces) and Minister Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma (NDZ) approves the decision of the Gauteng Provincial Executive, the DA is allowed to call those daily meetings. Unfortunately for the DA, the ANC as the official opposition in Council, has already accepted and made its view clear that it agrees with the decision of 139 (1) (c) to dissolve Council and have fresh elections in Tshwane. We also decided to wait for NCOP and Minister of Local Government Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma to apply herself before her decision and we follow suite thereafter. If the DA and Council failed to govern in the last eight (8) months. Why are we so desperate to govern in the last 14 days after the announcement of 139 (1) (c), what’s happening? As opposition, the ANC doesn’t have an added responsibility towards assisting DAs inability to perform its duties, the ANC in Tshwane is opposition and its responsibility is to expose the failures of the DA and hold it accountable; which we have done with magnanimous and stupendous execution. The ANC opposition strategy and tactics plan in Tshwane produced outstanding results, there is consensus among all political pundits in South Africa that the DA failed to govern Tshwane well as they claimed before. The veil of “Blue Lies” has been exposed for everyone to see than the DA can’t govern. The DA must tell the people of Tshwane how they formed quorum since 2016 when they took over, how did they take decision since 2016 even without the ANC to this day? The ANC has been protesting a number of DA decisions in Council and we staged walkouts, but the DA continued. *ANC walked out (staged protest action in Council) when*: Just the top five: a) When the DA expelled Ten Thousand *(10000) EPWP workers*, but the DA went ahead. b) When the DA stopped the establishment of the *Ward Committee* system for local wards, but the DA went ahead. c) When the DA appointed *people without qualifications*, but the DA went ahead. d) When the DA delivered a *budget to cover mainly areas in Pretoria East and Centurion* and refused to set aside money for *clean water in Hammanskraal*, but the DA continued. e. When the DA illegally appointed the *R12 Billion Glad Africa*, but the DA continued. *Today (2019) the Auditor General identified 187 irregularities in Tshwane finances* I can go on and on, we walked out when all the above decisions were made (AS PROTEST ACTION) but the DA continued without shame, why are they now angry when we protest? On their part, the DA walked out of National Assembly many times (AS PROTEST ACTION) while Presidents (i.e. Thabo Mbeki, Jacob Zuma et al) of the ANC and country presented SONA (State of the Nation Address). They walked out almost 26 times in Ministerial budget votes. Did the ANC stop with SONA or budgets because of the DA walkouts? If the answer is no, then why is the DA not going ahead without the ANC in Tshwane as the ANC did the same in the National Assembly? The ANC in Tshwane as opposition staged walks outs (AS PROTEST ACTION) since 2016 and now, but Council never stopped or postpone, why is it a problem now, why is the DA failing to form quorum and govern like it did since 2016, why are they blaming the ANC now? We know why, their 2016 partners no longer want them, is that an ANC problem, why are we blamed then for Council meeting quorum? *Conclusion* The ANC has never co-governing with the DA in Tshwane. So the DA can easily proceed with its other partners who previously assisted with quorum and go on with Council. The DA can go and appoint a Mayor, City Manager and approve its adjustment-budget without the ANC, its allowed. We have seen that the DA intends using the adjustment budget to ramp up services in the affluent areas as a camapaign budget for votes, we don’t agree to be part of such a budget. Our people live in veritable hell in Townships. The DA shouldn’t care about an opposition party’s behaviour of walkouts in Council, they use the same strategy after all. The ANC main preoccupation is to make sure that officials deliver services during the period of 14 days while we await the Minister of Local Government and the NCOP (National Council of Provinces) in Parliament. If the DA is doing so well in governance, why are they afraid to go back to the people for a fresh mandate, why do they reject by-elections? The DA must allow democracy to thrive and allow the people to decide the future of Tshwane. We want a government decided by the will of the people and not the courts. In anticipation of the NCOP and Ministers decision (based on circumstantial evidence), we are also preparing for by elections in the next 90 days. Our structures on the ground are fully briefed and we are going back to the people for a new fresh mandate to govern Tshwane. Let’s talk the truth about Tshwane. * Kgoši Maepa is the ANC Tshwane Chairperson and Leader of the ANC Caucus in Council