CAPE TOWN, March 15 – President Cyril Ramaphosa on Sunday declared a national state of disaster in South Africa and announced school closures and travel bans as the number of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infections in the country rose to 61. In a televised addressed to the nation, Ramaphosa said that, worryingly, South Africa had now experienced its first cases of domestic transmission of the virus whereas, up to the weekend, all people who had tested positive had done so upon return from abroad. “Initially, it was people who had travelled out of the country, especially from Italy, who had positively tested for the virus. It is concerning that we are now dealing with internal transmission of the virus,” he said. “This situation calls for an extraordinary response; there can be no half measures.” He said all schools would close from Wednesday and gatherings of more than 100 people were prohibited. South Africa would impose a travel ban from China, Germany, Iran, Italy, South Korea, Spain, and the United States from Wednesday, and South Africans were, with immediate effect, to refrain from travelling to the United Kingdom, Europe, the US, China, and South Korea. Any foreign national who had visited any country considered to be in the high risk category would be denied a visa to travel to South Africa. Ramaphosa said the government would update travel restrictions on a regular basis. South Africans who visited high risk areas from mid-February onwards would be obliged to report to health authorities for testing for COVID-19, which had now infected more than 162,000 worldwide. Those returning from high risk countries would be subjected to testing and self isolation or quarantine upon their return, while South Africans returning from medium risk countries, such as Portugal, Hong Kong, and Singapore, would be required to undergo high intensity screening. Ramaphosa said quarantine sites were being identified in all districts and municipalities across the country and additional funding was being allocated to all government entities involved in combating the spread of the virus and treating those affected. “It is clear this disease will be extremely disruptive,” Ramaphosa said in a speech delivered after an extraordinary Cabinet meeting on Sunday. The travel restrictions would have severe impact on land border posts, with 35 of the country’s 53 being closed from Monday. Ramaphosa said two of the country’s eight sea ports would be closed for passengers and crew changes, without giving further details. Government would suspend all non-essential travel by officials and was discouraging all non-essential domestic travel by air, rail, taxis, and buses. Schools were expected to reopen after the Easter weekend, and the winter school holiday would be a week shorter than usual to make up for lost time. Ramaphosa cautioned that the impact of the “pandemic” on the economy, including job creation and job retention, would likely be dire, and said a response plan would be implemented. He would personally head a national command council tasked with coordinating South Africa’s response to COVID-19. It would include an inter-ministerial committee already established and would meet three times a week. “This epidemic will pass, but it is up to us to determine how long it will last … it is true that we are facing a grave emergency. If the we act now, if we act decisively, I am sure we will defeat it.” National disaster legislation enabled government to integrate emergency and coordinate disaster management responses. Ramaphosa urged all South Africans to adapt their behaviour in terms of hygiene and physical contact, asking people to wash their hands frequently and to avoid shaking hands with others. – African News Agency (ANA)