By: Steve Motale Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu has called for an investigation into claims by businessman Tokyo Sexwale about the influence of money in ANC electioneering warrants an investigation. She was responding to claims by Sexwale that money was used to buy votes at the ANC’s 2017 elective conference. Cyril Ramaphosa won the election after facing tough competition from Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma. In an interview last week with television host JJ Thabane on the news channel Newzroom Afrika, Sexwale dropped a bombshell in a video that has since gone viral, saying ANC’s Nasrec conference was bought. “Nasrec was a shocker. Money was used to buy the conference. People have a lot of money from the government, and people marshalled money from outside. You buy a conference. “We don’t understand our moral compass anymore. Morally, ethically (and) politically, we have let our people down. How is it happening? Money, money, money. JJ, it’s all about money,” Sexwale said. Sexwale’s comments were similar to allegations made by Meshack Radebe, a former KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature deputy speaker. Radebe alleged to have seen delegates exchange money ahead of the Nasrec conference. “In the hotel where I was staying (in Johannesburg) the cash was given out at the foyer. Delegates would come in buses to collect cash. One of the leaders who was giving out money is now a minister. Delegates were each counting R5 000, R3 000, R4 000. Others were complaining that the money they had received was not enough,” said Radebe. While he did not name the person who was distributing the cash, Justice and Correctional Services Minister Ronald Lamola was caught on video distributing what appeared to be cash among some conference delegates. Delivering her political lecture on Sunday (1 March) at Luhlaza High School in Khayelitsha near Cape Town, Sisulu, who is also a member of the ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) deviated from her prepared speech and said something needed to be done if it was found that money was being used to buy elections within the ANC. “He (Sexwale) says the Nasrec conference was bought, and what controls the ANC now are those people who provided the money for that conference. It might be true, I don’t know. But call comrade Tokyo so he can expand on this and indeed if it is true, then we must do something about it. “If it is indeed true, we must change the way we elect our leaders. We cannot allow the power of money to determine who does what in our country,” she said to loud affirmations from the audience. Africa News 24-7 has learnt that Sisulu is frustrated by Ramaphosa’s failure to implement ANC Nasrec conference resolutions. An ANC NEC member who preferred to remain anonymous told Africa News 24-7 that Sisulu was making serious progress in winning the hearts and minds of radical economic transformation (RET) forces who are planning to use the ANC’s forthcoming ANC’s national general council (NGC) to remove Ramaphosa. “Should RET forces get their way at the NGC, they are looking at replacing Ramaphosa with comrade Lindiwe Sisulu, who they believe is the only candidate who will be brave enough to implement the ANC’s 54th national conference resolutions including the nationalisation of the Reserve Bank and land expropriation without compensation,” said the NEC member who is also supporting Sisulu. He added that many members of the ANC including those that previously supported Ramaphosa were disappointed with him. “They see him as someone who is conniving with the opposition, especially the DA to see to it that Nasrec resolutions are never implemented. Added the NEC member: “In comrade Sisulu, RET forces see someone who can genuinely unite and save the ANC from agents who are hell-bent on destroying our movement. Remember she comes from a family with impeccable struggle credentials. What she is seeing now is not the ANC she knows, hence her desire to lead and save our organisation”. CLICK HERE TO VIEW SPHETO SIYENGO’S ANALYSIS OF SISULU’S LECTURE  SEE SISULU’S FULL LECTURE BELOW: ANC renewal A Historical Perspective
 
Sandra King argues that “, The tiny seed knew that in order to grow, it needed to be dropped in dirt, covered with darkness, and struggle to reach the light. “The quest to reach the light from the depths of darkness, dirt are the critical preconditions of rebirth, renewal and renaissance. The renewal is a painful act and it means shedding some of the old habits and seeking reinvention and finding the light. 
 
Any living organism at some point of its existence requires a new injection of ideas, stimulus and any such other impetus to enhance its self and its continued survival. Any living organism is prone to adapting to new and ever-changing conditions that will mould and shape its form, structure and content.
 
Walter Sisulu in his Reflections in Prison, authored in 1976 states the following in respect of organizational renewal. “Every organisation engaged in national liberation constantly has to isolate, analyse and search for solutions crucial both to its continued existence and growth, and to the success of the struggle as a whole…In a certain sense, the story of our struggle is a story of problems arising and problems being overcome.”
 
The internal organizational factors such as leadership, membership and organizational culture form the basis of the rational for organizational renewal. The other factor is the prevailing socio- economic and political mood that obtains in a country at a particular juncture.  The latter mounds the organizational rejoinder and positions it for a forward march.  Depending on its response an organisation can face either distinction or extinction.
 
The ANC was born in 1912 and as such at that time was faced with the triumphalism of both the Boers and the British after the conclusion of the Treaty of Vereeniging. This treaty was occasioned by the end of the Anglo Boer War that saw the political interests of Africans side-lined with the unification of the four provinces.
 
The Treaty of Vereeniging ushered in a new social -political era where the betrayal of Africans became a coming factor henceforth. The Union of South Africa that was formed thereafter unveiled a litany of racists laws that tightened the noose around the African people. The 1913 Land Act became one such an act of barbaric proportion sending more than a million Africans to object poverty and slavery overnight.
 
Faced with these serious challenges the ANC was forced to renew its political strategies to respond to the objective conditions at the time. The international diplomatic offensive became a new terrain of struggle. The ANC took its grievances with the regime to the colonial capital of London and argued forcefully against racial oppression.
 
When the First World war broke out, the ANC was faced with a dilemma of either supporting the war or rejecting it. Based on the renewal strategy the ANC opted to support the war on the side of Britain with the view to placating them hoping that after the war the plight and cries of the African people would be reconfigured.
 
When this strategy failed to pay off, the ANC was faced with the challenge of devising a new approach. Strike action became the logical avenue when the ANC took a keen interest in the 1921 Rand Rebellion. The ANC renewed itself when in 1923 it adopted a new constitution which nullified the upper house of traditional leaders. Organizational renewal saw more branches formed and more offices opened. 
The disillusionment with the results of the First World War militarized more people who then swelled the ranks of the ANC. The outbreak of the Second World War further dashed hopes of a better life for the African people when their cries were ignored. The leadership of Dr A.B. Xuma came hot on the heels of the disillusionment with the outcomes of the Second World War.
 
To respond to these new challenges the ANC under Xuma underwent a serious modernization and renewal. The renewal took the form of the following cabbages: administrative re-examinations. a new constitution was adopted that factored in a new critical structure called the NWC. Realizing the difficulties of meetings given the vast distances that NEC members had to travel to the head office, the NWC filled that void. The NWC was composed of people who resided within a radius of some 100 kilometres who could meet frequently in- between the NEC. This innovation enabled the speed of decision making and organizational coordination to flourish. Another critical step in the organizational renewal was the formation of the ANC Youth League in 1944. This resolution to this effect was passed in December 1943 after the leadership realized an increase in cases of strikes at most colleges of education and at high schools.
 
The birth of the Youth League brought renewed vigour in the politics of South Africa. A crop of young militant activists soon burst into the political space and drastically altered the fortunes of the ANC. These names included Nelson Mandela, Water Sisulu, Oliver Tambo, AP Mda, Robert Resha to name a few. This renewal resulted in the new era that was characterized as a transition from “Protest to Challenge. “The adoption of the 1949 Program of Action called for more confrontational action against the regime and civil disobedience of the racist laws that were passed by the Nationalist Party after its assumption of power in 1948.
 
The organizational and tactical renewal of the ANC saw the People’s movement become a massed based organization that shot up its membership. The 1953 Defiance Campaign that was based on defying all apartheid laws fused a sense of sacrifice and militancy in the ranks of our people. Many People who defied were arrested and many more others were beaten. A new phase of personal sacrifice characterized this renewal with most teachers who defied fired from their profession. This is why many teachers began careers in law and others went to teach at the neighbouring countries. Duma Nokwe was fired and started a degree in law and Eskia Mphahlele went to teach in Lesotho.
 
The capacity of the ANC as a fighting machine was further enhanced with the signing of the Doctors Pact which began the new phase of alliance politics. The ANC entered into a political and strategic alliance with the Communist Party and the Natal Indian Congress. This Alliance waged a frontal attack on the regime when it convened the Congress of the People in Kliptown in 1955. The congress of the People marked a phenomenal political and strategic redefinition of the ANC when the masses of our people met together to craft a new vision of their envisaged future.
 
This was a future of an egalitarian, democratic, liberated and an open society for the many generations to come. The contractors to the Kliptown Chatter knew that they were not going to be the beneficiaries of a new nation but, nevertheless, put earnest and strenuous efforts into securing its framework. This move poised the ANC as a future government whose plan could be contrasted with the apartheid plan. The apartheid plan came not just second, but miles behind a sound vision for the future.
 
The year 1994 saw the historic realization of the struggles and sacrifices of our people coming to final fruition. The transition from a political party to a governing party required  serious renewal of both. The adoption of the Strategy and Tactics Document and the Ready to Govern firmed our hand over both party and state. Transforming an apartheid killing machinery into a democratic one required deep, thoughtful and serious appreciation of the historical burden and the envisaged future.
 
The era of technology and the 4th Industrial Revolution presents another historic opportunity for renewal. The adoption of a Pan African vision that will see the opening up of boundaries to enable the creation of an African Free Trade Area will catapult African economic growth.