Human Settlement, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu today addressed the SA Municipal Workers Union (SAMWU) Eastern Cape Provincial Congress. Thank you for the invitation to join you at this SAMWU Eastern Cape Provincial Conference. I apologize for not being able to join you earlier, but we had a parliamentary programme that i had to attend. I do not want to stress the reason why we as an organisation opted for a tripartite alliance. It is because we understood three of the four pillars of our struggle. Our fight was for the realisation of the rights of the most disadvantaged and dispossessed, Blacks in particular and workers who bore the brunt of the savage conditions under which they eked out a living on wages that were determined for them, as they had no power to bargain, working conditions were the most unimaginably inhumane. When Ruth First, as a journalist uncovered the conditions of workers on the farms in Bethal, who used their bare hand to dig and plant potatoes and also used their bare hands to harvest potatoes, she discovered that some of the bodies of the workers were buried right there. It is a gruesome tale, but just an example of circumstances under which our people worked. The exploration of our minerals made the mining industry of this country more profitable by the exploitation of workers working underground, unprotected, paid slave wages. All of this was enabled by a system that forcefully removed our people from the land and gave them no other option but to work on the mines and other developed industries. This history is known to all of you. I am retelling it to emphasize the importance of the sphere of labour in our fight against exploitation. This is what has made it possible for us to be where we are. The organized labour of our people, the SACP, which helped us sharpen our ideology, led by a vanguard party, the ANC. I want to use this opportunity to remind you of that space that you occupy, its vital role in securing the basic rights of our people and more importantly, its vital role to lead society and to lead by example. I have been in many departments, but most of them have been in the service delivery environment and as a weight carrier, I have also been in a security departments, where I have witnessed powerful force, such as this, not always leading and sometimes when it leads, i have experienced it with some concern. I am happy that in this Conference you have had, you have had time to reflect and recalibrate how far we still have to go. In the ANC, we say our power lies in our branches, in our roots. You are part of our roots where our power lies. For us to succeed year in and year our in any election, it is your work we depend on to show our people how far we are in delivery. I hope you understand the power you have to make a difference to our people. The power that you used to enable us to win election after election. And where we have not won it, it is at your level where we have lost it. I hope there has been an introspection about this. It came as a shock to us when we lost three Metros in 2015 and it was clear to us that our people were not feeling our delivery. I want to be clear about this, I am not saying that we lost because of municipal workers. We lost in spite of us having organized labour at municipalities and I hope you reflect on that. The first Metro we lost was Cape Town and the Western Cape. And because it was convenient to us, we blamed it on deep-seated Apartheid, we blamed it on an undecided Colored vote and we blamed it on the blatant racism of the people of the Western Cape. It served us well to find a reason, but we could not continue down that line when we lost Tshwane, Johannesburg and Nelson Mandela Bay. We, at a political leve had many workshops to identify where it went wrong. We identified the wrong choice of councillors, but one thing was clear. Our people had lost confidence in us. I am keen to find out from you if you made an assessment on why we lost these three Metros. Where are you as the people lose confidence in us? You are our closest link to the people. You are our most vital foot soldiers. You are the part of us that knows our people better than we do. Where are you as the lost confidence in us? You, who live with our people are expected to provide the mos dedicated care to our people, because you know them, you know their conditions. From you they only expect the best. We need to assess whether you gave them the time. We regularly come together to assess why are enable to give our people the best and they are beginning to say what they think of us: Promises, promises, promises and no delivery!! The drivers of the delivery vans are yourselves. The producers of their immediate right are yourselves. We can count how many house the government provides. These are provided through yourselves. We can determine how many households have clean water. This is delivered through yourselves. We know how many of our people have access to proper sanitation. You should provide it. I could go on and on. For all these basic services, our people look to you to provide. We don’t have clean towns and cities. There is a saying that you can see the heart and soul of a person from their cleanliness and how they look after themselves. Some even exaggerate that cleanliness is the same as godliness. The point i am making is that you are the sharp point of everything that we deliver to our people every day. I have worked in an environment where you provide my services, but so as not to be prejudiced by my own failure, I have looked at the most recent report of the Auditor-General which made headlines for all the wrong reasons last year. AG Report – annexure 1 The Auditor-General says that there were municipalities across the country that constantly achieved a clean audit over all the years we have been in government and he lists them. Twelve of these are in the Western Cape and how many are there in the provinces that we govern?? Gauteng…. one. KwaZulu-Natal… one. Eastern Cape… one! The rest have none. The Metros had a better chance, but the AG continues to raise concerns about Nelson Mandela Bay, Buffalo City, Mangaung, Tshwane and Johannesburg. I was not here to hear your discussions, so i would not know if there are answers to this. I came to tell you my view about our performance where you lead and it is not good. It might be true that 60% of our failures are caused by politicians, but how much do you think is caused by us here, who leads administration in municipalities? China leads and continues to lead, not because they make the right decisions all the time, but because they have a dedicated workforce in their administration. They don’t have an Auditor-General or other measurements of success. Every worker in ther administration of china is committed, diligent and proud to be contributing. What about us? Thank you!