By: Clyde Ramalaine As the adage goes, words have meaning. The term counter-revolutionary in the history of linguistic understanding is often used to describe behaviour in the tendency of a person(s). According to most dictionaries, it is used as an adjective but can also be a noun. It explains or defines someone engaged in or promoting a revolution that opposes a previous one or reverses its results. We know that counter-revolution may also be either positive and negative in its consequences As the account lead, the transitory success of Agis and Cleomenes of ancient Sparta in restoring the constitution of Lycurgus was considered by Plutarchto be counter-revolutionary in a positive sense. Equally so during the French Revolution, the Jacobins saw the Counter- revolution in the Vendée as distinctly negative, whilst it was strongly supported by the exiled Royalists, the Catholic Church, and the people of the provinces. In ANC circles it has become normative to label others in organisational and tripartite settings interspersed factional politics. We have seen this and will continue to see it in the future. In this sense labelling, someone a counter-revolutionary in the ANC circles constitutes almost always a negative and grave claim aimed at inflicting severe pain as a means of characterisation. The term is as strong as impimpi, or sell-out
A few days ago, ANC Chairperson Gwede Mantashe returning from Zimbabwe as a member of the delegation of his political party made a public statement. This trip sees Minister of Defense, Nosiviwe Mapisa- Nqakula and the high level of ANC delegation that accompanied her on a SANDF jet accused of conflating state and party institutions for allowing senior ANC leader to hitch a hike across the Limpopo to engage the ZANU-PF leadership. We can comfortably assume that Mantashe had at aim to come to the aid or defense of the current president. In his interview, Mantashe ventured to condemn the subsequent letters of those who wrote in response to the Ramaphosa letter. He singled out the letter penned by former president Jacob G. Zuma who in the aftermath of Ramaphosa’s letter also exercised his member’s rights and privilege to respond. In this sense, Mantashe entered the season of letters discourse fully conscious of what he was doing when he chose to label others, he has beef with, when they reply to Ramaphosa as counter-revolutionary. Let us, therefore, venture an attempt at contextualising what happened before Mantashe’s statement. Mantashe continues a season of labelling from the tired toolbox of crippled communist-rhetoric that often attest blunt weapons of attack aimed at silencing others from his positional chair. Three weeks ago, ANC President Cyril M. Ramaphosa, in the heat of COVID – 19 Lockdown PPE Corruption in which billions were misappropriated took easy refuge in penning a letter to ANC members decrying the state of corruption as levelled against the ANC. It is important to engage the context for this letter which by itself marked another unprecedented moment of the Ramaphosa leadership of the former liberation movement and now entrenched SA political party, namely the African National Congress. It was not the first time that Ramaphosa opted to be different to all former leaders of the ANC. We will recall that he late in his campaign for high office in 2017 publicly endorsed slate politics by announcing his preferred crop of leaders that he dubbed his “Dream Team”. Mantashe was in that dream team by the way. Up until then, it was not accepted practice that aspirant presidents declare their preferred slates since slate politics in the ANC purportedly is not in the acceptable ethos of the organization/party. Ramaphosa’s now-infamous CR17 Campaign was also the first to have raised in the history of the ANC in elections contest in excess of R1bn to ensure his marginal 179 vote win victory at Nasrec. Recently we have heard SACP Deputy Secretary General Solly Mapaila a vociferous CR17 campaigner publicly confess to how the 54th Conference at NASREC was bought by those who have deep-pockets for influencing of Mpumalanga delegates. This is not the first time a senior leader speaks on this; current Minister of Justice Ronald Lamola was audiotaped in the vernacular engaging a conversation on money for votes. So, the Nasrec 54th Conference remains one shrouded in substantial claims of a rigged and bought election. It is no secret that anyone running for ANC high office warrant resources broadly defined and, in the past, undeniably all successful bids came with degrees of help. However, what was and remains unprecedented is how the CR17 raised capital as in money outside the ANC essentially from non-ANC voters best understood in yes I dare say it again white monopoly capital circles to have Ramaphosa in the driving seat or shall we say to have the guy they prepared since 1978 as the leader of the ANC. Rooms were booked for ANC candidates in Monte Casino by among others Bidvest. In a tangible sense never has external capital so influenced an internal ANC campaign for leadership. We know this because Chief Justice Mogoeng in his 2019 Mandela Lecture alluded to the morality conundrum when he asserted no one gives you R10m and expect nothing in return. Hence when Ramaphosa recently decided to write his letter to the ANC members as his introduction unambiguously leads, he continued in what can now be called un-ANC practices or should we say he continued pulverizing practices and norms that defined the ANC in history of presidential leadership. What is lost in the translation of Ramaphosa’s letter is its direct context, the Saturday before Ramaphosa’s Sunday’s well-publicized letter, the WHO Secretary-General, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus in strong remarks, when interviewed on SA COVID-19 related PPE corruption stated, corruption which deprives health workers of appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) threatened not only their lives but also the lives of their patients from the novel coronavirus? Ghebreysus went further to assert, “However, corruption related to PPE… for me it’s actually murdered. [sic] In a terse response, he dared to say what is happening as shared on the PPE corruption is tantamount to SA active in murder by not letting the correct resources get to those who most need it because it allows for corruption practices. It remains my submission that had it not been for this statement by Ghebreyesus there would have been no letter from the president. Meaning Ramaphosa wrote that letter in direct response to the WHO Secretary-General Ghebreyesus’ statement with that as the epicentre. Known for his overreliance on public relations and personal imaging he needed to deflect the real heat for being directly accused in the leadership of the SA State that is abusing the poor and vulnerable thus murdering through the avarice and greed of politicians. We all by now have read the letter which takes the challenge of corruption to the ANC members directly implying the organization meaning its members are corrupt. Since whether we want to romanticize the ANC in almost 109 years of glory as Africa’s oldest surviving liberation movement the truth is the ANC belongs to its approximately 700000 members in the final analysis. Ramaphosa, therefore, did not write to ANC voters but to members in good standing, paid-up members who have sworn allegiance to an organizational constitution that governs their membership in which members share in the democratic franchise of both rights, privileges and responsibilities. To be fair to Mantashe, it is only right to mention that he as Secretary-General in a time past also defended the Zuma presidential leadership against what was considered a vitriolic Thabo Mbeki statement. Mantashe was clear in his response that, ‘we are still mopping up the mess of the Mbeki administration/leadership.’ It is, therefore, not strange that Mantashe as chairperson would venture as is his right and privilege no different to any other member or leader of the ANC an opinion. We one day may honestly have to debate the actual role of a chairperson in the ANC setting for what it is. Since we all know that this position was created in an epoch when Mandela was coming in to lead the ANC and OR Tambo needed to be honoured. It is not unfair to say the position was created in its original intent in honouring a leader that led for 30 years at a crucial time of Mandela leadership. I am personally of the view the ANC can do without this position because it’s an honorary position, however, we know it’s now entrenched as an official National Office Bearer (NOB) position. (Let us park this for another day) However, what Chairperson Mantashe said is what we seek to problematize. Mantashe used his statement to address the ANC through the platform of the media on solicited responses as initiated by the Ramaphosa letter. He went on to take refuge in the old communist linguistic of calling those counter-revolutionary since what they are doing is to pretend to be revolutionary when they are counter-productive as leading an onslaught against the incumbent. Mantashe committed a few fundamental errors with his chairperson privilege Firstly, he chose to ignore the unprecedented nature of the Ramaphosa letter within a historical setting. He could have attempted to contextualise the letter and in evenhandedness critique it. He secondly ignored the content of the letter as addressed to ANC members and what that means as a first. He thirdly had no appetite to engage the efficacy and necessity of the Ramaphosa to have opted to write a letter. He also refused to engage the content of letters objectively while he naturally assumed Ramaphosa’s letter was necessary. Mantashe blurred his personal views with his chairperson position. If OR Tambo was the reason for the Chairperson position it can be argued one of the ANC’s signposts of evenhandedness practice warrant the chairperson position to be above factional rhetoric and glib accusations or point-scoring. He dares to claim these letters are orchestrated as a campaign to vilify and create an impression the organization in members have grave challenges with the president. Lastly, he perhaps overtly and irrevocably confirmed the ANC a political party in which some of its leaders consider themselves not just custodians of ANC values but instead owning the party as their prized possession when they highly intolerant to opposite views and even frank critique. Mantashe read members the riot act not to attacking a sitting president, while this may have had the intent of nobility its conflated principle, praxis, office, and status of what constitutes membership in the ANC increasingly for some leaders have come to mean. Mantashe compels all, members, sympathizers and those who have kept the ANC in power through a ballot to ask; but whose ANC is this if not paid-up members who have continued to keep an organisation alive? It is commonly and pragmatically sloganeered that the ANC belongs to the masses, yet that is the romantic version of how the ANC sought its place in managing history. The truth is the ANC belongs to its members like any other political party anywhere in the world. In the final analysis, we must come to accept the ANC is a political party. Mantashe called members who disagree with Ramaphosa’s opinion as articulated in his letter counter-revolutionary only because for him and other members must listen to leadership, must not disagree and dare not be public about it when the president can be public in his address to members. What Mantashe in this myopic new concept of ANC membership missed is if he is willing to label members in their varied responses from letters to social media posts counter-revolutionary, what was the president’s letter? Since he ventured an opinion, he owes it to explain why he thought the president was revolutionary, and who gets to draw the proverbial line on what is revolutionary and counter-revolutionary in a factional ANC. Was Ramaphosa’s letter revolutionary? Are members to obediently toe the line and forego their rights as was always custom to engage fellow members who happen to be leaders. Mantashe forgot in the final analysis that Ramaphosa and Mantashe like all members are just an ANC member currently privileged to lead. Maybe the 13 years in office-bearer leadership has rendered him blunt to appreciate what it means to be an ordinary ANC member. The ANC who often plays around with constructs of organisational renewal must watch these new tendencies of leadership that have no appetite to engage content but are quick to label others counter-revolutionary when they really want subordination derived from pure positional power. Once Ramaphosa or any leader writes to members you simply cannot run roughshod and unilaterally remove the rights, privileges and responsibilities of members to have an opinion in response. Unless the long-standing notion of a ‘broad church’ in the description of whom the ANC is pretending mere lip-service and the ANC since 2017 has transformed into a dictatorship where elected members dictate to non-elected members what to think, how to express and what content to engage which leadership makes public. The ANC warrants asking why Ramaphosa must be treated as an endangered species. Why he cannot take the heat with the position that he wanted and campaign and secured? Ramaphosa’s letter remains his letter as a member who is privileged to serve as ANC president. His letter equally is his opinion and not the automatic gospel, meaning it cannot be sacrosanct because positional power declares it holy. He does not have unique and unfettered power or rights to the exclusion of all other members. Former President Jacob Zuma, like his predecessor Thabo Mbeki [it was Mbeki’s prerogative and choice to be absent in discourse for the first term of Zuma presidency], have every right to pen his letter and challenge Ramaphosa on what we all know is his short-feet to accept ownership for the R500bn COVID – 19 Lockdown crimes of corruption that took place under his unique watch. Mantashe simply is not the barometer to determine what is an attack or what constitutes a correct response to Ramaphosa’s letter and cannot arrogate a right to adjudicate on such, at best he can share his equal opinion. He could have done better to engage content than to advance an opinion as a referee. Members likewise cannot be held hamstrung by gutter-labelling and ought to directly challenge Mantashe to explain why he takes cheap comfort in denigrating their rightful and entitled solicited opinions and responses as counter-revolutionary when he is woefully is silent on if the president was not disingenuous with his letter. One naturally would have expected Mantashe, given the history of an OR Tambo necessitated chairperson role, to attempt objectivity and advocate for balance but maybe that is too big an ask in an organisation where factionalism is the pervasive entrenched endemic culture, where positional power blinds leaders in openness for self-introspection. We must surmise those who resort to labelling, naturally exonerates themselves from what they accuse others while they arrogantly claim to know the meridian of what is revolutionary and counter-revolutionary per se. Unless ANC members agree the party they signed up to is not a dictatorship where leaders have a final say and they simply say yes. This is the power of discourse we fought for and positional power cannot silence or attempt eroding the gains of public opinion especially if solicited. Ramaphosa opened the debate with his letter let a thousand flowers from within and outside the ANC bloom in the democratic franchise, we need no self-appointed adjudicators but active participants.