By: Clyde Ramalaine A soft and slow return is irrational and also impractical – If we are at war with COVID-19, can we stop running and take the fight to the enemy The rationale for a slow lifting of lockdown articulated in classical stages of confusion and levels of doublespeak has gripped the minds, souls and preoccupation of all but some of us who still argue the irrationality of the choice for a lockdown in the first instance. Today we learned all of us can be on the streets to exercise between 6am and 9am with Level 4 Lockdown rules and regulations. The irony with this is the sophism that while we are exercising COVID-19 is fast asleep resting from roaming since it is activated from 9am onwards. This is how ridiculous these ill-thought regulations are. Sadly the obsession to advocate for a slow unlocking is built on the misconception that the ‘virus’ ostensibly lives and moves somewhere and if we tiptoe around it we will be able to somehow outsmart it with the accoutrements of masks, gloves and sanitization otherwise dubbed PPE. The advocates for this gradual opening of economies, social lives, academic activity, religious worship, sports-life and that which define what we have established as our normal argue this is the best way to beat the invisible. All-day long from the pint-sized questionable USA Dr Fauci to the accidental Covid-19 hero Ramaphosa we are pummeled in Pavlovian conditioning to believe and buy into the notion of we must not just return to what we knew as normal. These prophets propagate an idea that we can outfox an invisible, less understood and frenzied “individual”of a virus by apparently deceiving it. As the stone-cold reality of the unequivocal necessity of restarting the economy, which suffered a grave abrupt interruption and violent intrusion, mounts from the vestiges of both reason and an unavoidable impending anarchy those who entertain and advocate this slow return want us to tiptoe back into what we knew before March 2020. I have from the start questioned the rationality of this lockdown and I am equally opposed to the notion of a slow and super-soft return. This would be the biggest evidence that we are giving the unseen interruptions real or fake such due respect to not serve it the medicine of its own practice in abruptness. Since virologists and epidemiologists sing from the same hymnal with mega-bucks business persons and politicians that there is no medicine to COVID-19, I would as always against the tide and apparent better knowledge advocate for a hard, abrupt and fast return to our normality. In the world of the war there is no silent war or a soft response to the abuse served by the perpetrators of war. Why then should we after the president and his jaundiced group of ministers told us we in war treat the enemy with this much respect? Why should we revere this unseen enemy yet drape ourselves ever so dapper in combat camouflage to symbolise a war when we have no intention to take aim at the enemy? If we in war let us fight and let us take the fight to the perpetrator? We can’t be that scared of the unseen enemy and yet publicise that we are at war. A war that we remotely hope to win with devoid of any expectation at taking a shot at the enemy. I have argued we never deserved any hard lock down what we always needed was defiance of fear and that defiance ought to have been a hard fight not a guaranteeing of the healthy but a hard fight. It is becoming daily clearer that the practicality of easing back regardless to how we seek in the softness of not disturbing the so-called sleeping dragon with an expected long tail that threatens a more violent return towards September and October poses more than basic challenges. In between sophisticated plans at macro level and the practical process implementation falls apart all efforts to to truly stand up against COVID-19. We saw it again today when the National education department in irrationality left us more confused. It glaring when a army ranked obsessed Bheki Cele as police minister confuses lockdown as a means of governance. The latter uniquely more obsessed to keep alcohol from consumers. His rationale no liquor no crime. All this while cigarettes are sold yet COVID-19 is a respiratory disease. We are told a soft return sees 50% of the mines return but you still can’t by simple warm food. The inconsistencies not just glaring but wholly absurd. All this while our children need debriefing more than going to school as guinea-pigs. What society that advocates caution can be this callous to want to sent the children out to face the enemy when the parents are still kept under lockdown? The truth is you can’t have some return to work you simply can’t have some return to school while the church doors and sports centres remain shut as if you can fool the enemy. What this notion of going back slowly suggests is wholly abnormal for what we came to know and live as normal. What then are our choices? Our choices I would advocate have already been made. I would think we either succumb to this enemy by shutting us all even all 60+ cabinet and government officials [another less upheld regulations since 60% of cabinet from President are over 60] in until October and let COVID-19 roam like the demon-possessed man of Gadara to parade in every inch and square-foot of our common spaces that marks our freedom rights. Alternatively you let us out to violently reclaim what is ours in a similar abrupt manner as was visited upon us to claim back our meaningful life. No war was ever won by an army that feared and respected its enemy more than their own beliefs to conquer whom they face, regardless of how disguised, irrespective how lethal and despite how contagious. If we are in a war can we let the rules of war apply? If we are in war dare we respect and fear the enemy as prognosticated? Since we are in war can we take the fight to the enemy and stop showing him our back? Every war has casualties and assuming there would be none is the clearest evidence of a misconstrued idea of war. Yea we have lost soldiers and loved ones all 100 of them. Yea the enemy has infected and injured almost 5000 but don’t forget a regiment of almost 2000 soldiers who violently battled and subdued and overcame the enemy with no evidence of defeat. If nothing should inspire us it is the indefatigable hearts of 2000 that refused to stop fighting with no weapons but their faith and heart. They fought when church leaders ran scared and silent into obedience pleading rationality when all we saw was a betrayal of their faith in practical sense. Permit me to say it again every war and fight needs heart hitherto we have been fearmongered and sent into a frenzy of disarmament and paralysis. So Mr. President let us have a hard opening of our meaningful lives in every sphere that defines our normal. At what stage does the enemy learn do respect us when we are dead scared of doing what we have done for centuries in the normality of what we knew as life. Let Workers-Day become workers- return-day let us take back our lives and tell COVID-19 to hell with you you. In the words of the historical JESUS the Galilean when he upon entering Caesarea Phillipi unequivocally told Peter his first disciple among others THE GATES OF HELL SHALL NOT PREVAIL AGAINST CHURCH. We may just discover COVID-19 fear us more than the respect we have extended so far. COVID-19 may just wonder why we so scared when it really only may have truly claimed 23 of the 100 victims. It’s time we stop resorting to covert action let us be overt in our defiance. A worthy enemy expects a fight not an army running away. 