Dear Cde SG I’m sure you’re preoccupied with the momentous task of ensuring that we deal decisively with the invincible enemy that has ravaged communities throughout the world, namely; Covid-19. This letter does not seek to place additional burden upon you Cde SG, when already our communities and society looks towards the ANC and it’s government for answers and solice. We as young activists are taught that the ANC is a leader of society therefore ANC Leads and ANC Lives. I watched with interest and fortitude the memorial lecture of President OR Tambo that you delivered on digital platoforms. It’s safe to say that revolutionaries worldwide are in agreement that the highest price to pay in a revolution is to sacrifice one’s life. I’m buoyed by your call that young people should not be “ice boys” and “cheerleaders” to individual leaders but should be a critical and radical voice within the ANC, just as Cde Tambo stated: Roar Young Lions Roar. The history of the ANC Youth League stands as testimony to the constructive role the organised youth of our country can and should play in helping to shape the course of our society. As we celebrate 108 years that lie behind us, it is worthwhile and progressive to reflect on the lessons learnt and on how they apply in our present circumstances. For there can be no doubt that the contribution and the involvement of the youth to and in the burning national issues is as important and crucial as ever. It is therefore necessary that the youth are informed by thoughtful analysis and act in ways that are strategically considered. The role of the youth league in shaping and influencing the future trajectory of the ANC can never be overstated, it is comforting to hear a leader of the ANC reasserting the central role of the Youth in reinvigorating and renewing the ANC. The youth remain the first line of defense of the ANC. An attack on the leaders of the ANC is an attack on the ANC itself. In your lecture Cde SG you touched on the challenges that faced Cde OR as a leader of the ANC. He lead the ANC and kept it together to the detriment of his health. I’m sure Cde Ace, you will agree with me that the ANC faces even bigger challenges from both within and without our organization. What caused me to write this letter to you is the fact that I am reminded of the fact that the apartheid machinery and its apparatus are still active and seek to topple the ANC and its government. This is indicative at the sustained and consistent attack on leaders of the movement through the court of public opinion. Media outlets have long seized being news tellers but have become the third force in our society, pseudo journalists have become the de facto shadow government. They will destroy and vilify anyone and anything that they deem an obstacle in their path. One wonders to who’s benefit and pleasure do they derive their mandate and agenda. The ANC once resolved to establish the Media Appeals Tribubal, which would’ve been a watchdog to all media establishments, maybe it’s time this thought is revisited. Cde SG you seem to be the main recipient and victim of this vicious and ferocious sustained attack by the neo-liberal media. They have identified you as point of contact in order to further weaken the ANC, a weak ANC means a disjointed government that can not discharge its mandate of a better life for all. Cde OR Tambo in one of his addresses stated: “close ranks, Be vigilant, comrades. The enemy is vigilant. Beware the wedge driver! Men who creep from ear to ear, driving wedges among us; who go around creating splits and divisions. Beware the wedge driver! Watch his poisonous tongue”. We as young people within and without the ANC and the broader mass democratic movement don’t see the sustained character assassination on you through faceless “sources” and “leaks” as an innocent and/or a “by the way matter” but we see this as bigger plot to unseat the ANC as the governing party as President OR Tambo warned. The Secretary General is an important portfolio within the movement, you’re discharged with many responsibilities, chief amongst them; to ensure full implementation of conference resolution. It is common cause that Radical Economic Transformation is the adopted resolution of the 54th National Conference. Some within our society would like us to believe that this is a “factional” view however we, the rank and file of the organization are aware that this is a resolution of conference. Having said this Cde Ace, remain unshaken, strong, fearless and resolute in discharging the responsibilities assigned to you by the branches and delegates of our glorious movement. You do not have to defend yourself against pseudo politicians masquerading as journalists, history will absolve you. We shall beat the dog until it’s master comes out. Victoria De Beer
Member of ANC & ANCYL