By: Sello Theletsane The ANC in the Free State has suspended Matjhabeng executive mayor
Nkosenjani Speelman both from the organisation and his mayoral position. The swift action follows an exclusive report published by Africa News 24-7 about a video in which Speelman was seen calling on the army to deal with coloureds residing in Bronville, a coloured township outside Welkom in the Free State. In the video Speelman can be a
heard addressing an SANDF parade during which he referred to coloured people residing in Bronville as Boesmanne (Bushmen). Speelman went on further, calling on the soldiers “to go out there and show them that you are soldiers”. He accused people in Bronville of drinking and thereafter going go the streets, in violation of lockdown restrictions. The mayor also expressed his wish for soldiers to remain in the area “for more or less two years. In a statement, ANC Free State spokesman Thabo Meeko said officials of the ANC met and considered the issue “about the unfortunate racist and regrettable utterances of Mayor of Matjhabeng, Cde Nkosinjani Speelman while making welcoming address to members of the South African National Defence Force arriving in Welkom”. “We have learned that Cde Speelman has referred to coloured community members of Bronville in Welkom as “boesmans” who should be subjected to skop and donner.” Meeko added: “These utterances are uncalled for from an ANC leader and the deployee of the ANC and do not represent the views of the ANC regarding the standing of coloured people in the country.^
Meeko said the ANC “is an organisation guided by principles of unity, non-racialism, non-sexism and democratic”. “This are basic principles which must be upheld by all members of the ANC.” “In light of the seriousness of the utterances of Cde Nkosinjani Speelman, the officials have decided to temporarily suspend Cde Nkosinjani Speelman as both member of the ANC and public representative in line with rule 25.60.” Meeko said Speelman had violated the provision of the ANC Constitution “in particular rule 27.17.6 which prohibits and classifies as misconduct all forms of racist utterances”.