[A Mitchell’s Plain based Educator shares a coalface response and plea to the Minster of DBE Angie Motshekga to lead instead of playing Russian Roulette with the lives of our children by a Level 4 Return to school kamikaze plan] Dear Angie Make the right call, because I can tell you exactly how it’s going to pan out if you reopen schools. If you want to know what’s going to happen, inbox me please. But this is what I know: No one could’ve predicted this scenario-and yet here we are. An extraordinary scenario playing out in real time with the ability to infect whoever gets in its way. Who are we fooling when we say that social distancing can be applied in schools? Maybe at a school with only 20 learners. No matter which way it gets spinned, it ain’t gonna happen. Teachers are once again going to be used to do the grunt work- receiving learners, screening learners, isolating learners who present signs, phoning parent, maintain distancing, washing of hands, accompanying to toilets, playground duty everyday, etc. etc. etc. The risk is that one infected person in the school can have a domino effect on the entire organization at any given moment on any given day! Then there’s the trauma of dealing with securing of posts because some teachers will be booked off sick! Worst case scenario is that we will start the first day of school without 6-7 educators. And I have so many issues, too numerous to mention. In this extraordinary scenario the health of people surely must trump the curriculum. The school and the curriculum will remain steadfast, but not at the risk of losing lives in the process. Schools must remain closed until the number of infections decrease substantially to allow for a safe return, with the necessary precautions in place. But now is not the time. There is too much trauma from learners and educators to deal with as well. It cannot be business as usual. No normal teaching can take place in an abnormal society. And this reopening is a race to complete a curriculum- streamlined or not. It’s about all the teaching time that has been lost. It’s not about the health and welfare of learners and teachers. This is what I know. And you know it as well. Do the right thing. Politics aside. You do not gamble with the lives and wellbeing of people you are serving. You are a servant leader. Lead for God’s sake, lead!!!!!!!!!!!!!! I ask of you. Carlyn Jacobs Abrahams
Deputy Principal of Hillside, Mitchell’s Plain
Writes in her personal Capacity
-Please share and make this go viral? –