By: Clyde Ramalaine It is a given that the current extension of two weeks of lockdown will also be repeated. We know the President and his COVID-19 team has the magical date of June 26, 2020 as the true 3 month cycle for an international advised lockdown period and is merely doing it now in chunks of 21 or 14 days at a time with phased easing that simply do not make sense. Even when we reach June 26, you will hear of a second tail of this Covid-19 as we already hear is seen from Asia. I agree with Prof Jonathan Jansen’s call that we end this school year and promote all grade 1-11 and develop a restructured curriculum with a definite catch up for 2021. In regards to matriculants grade them on their Grade 11 marks. It is perhaps important to start by raising the need for debriefing of all our children. There is no recorded study yet on the trauma children endured in being subjected to the bombardment of daily unending messages of the COVID-19 virus and it’s devastating impact as global pandemic. This is besides the known tensions in many households brought about by the challenge of uncertainty on many fronts that so often spill over in shouting matches between adults in which children are often also victims. I am of the view if and whenever school reopens this ought to be prioritized since it’s necessary. When one speaks of restructuring of curricula it is the conscious and proactive acts to ensure the essentials that contain an academic year is covered. This at conceptual and framework level must be led by the ministry and the department. To this end we expect educators no different to all off us who are now adjusting to new workspace environment to be daily in digital Zoom and Microsoft Teams meetings to engage the modalities, ramifications and do-abilities of an adjusted curriculum sensibility. If any school principal hitherto has not convened a Zoom meeting with his entire staff on the subject of curriculum restructure etc, he warrants being fired on the spot. If HOD’s have not yet began to develop action plans as engaging their respective staff groups they too deserve to be relieved of their job. SGB’s ought to be giving oversight at this time if we serious about our children. Organised labour fraternities owe it to place the children first and thus have a responsible role to play in all of this. My primary reason for that is the advanced idea of promoting e-learning as a means for teaching regardless to how romantic which again feeds the interests of the have and have not’s. In a society where data regardless to recent attempts at reduction remains exorbitantly high and not transferable since it is not a basic right we know already what the result will be the privileged with access to data will again benefit at the expense of the poor. It’s time we get sober. Don’t talk to me about 4IR when the ANC until now could not even hurdle the Data problem. Data access being a privilege in 2020 is another proof of ANC failure of the poor. I ask again what political leadership that cares could lack the heart to force network providers to allow data transfers across networks at least. My second reason is you simply can’t practice social distancing in classrooms where there are 35-80 kids at once. It is high time the duped ones admit the entire idea of social distancing is a privileged and class interest disposition. Thirdly, wearing masks and gloves for its impractical school context and equally further anomalous hygienic challenges can’t be sustained in a school going context among the majority of SA schools which majority continues to represent the poor. In the fourth instance it would be practically impossible for teachers to teach 10 students at a time in a social distanced space in the public school system – this would mean the teacher would have to teach 4-8 times to get one lesson done given our SA public school class population. In the fifth instance school going children reliant on bus and mini-bus forms of transport poses another challenge for the social distancing prognosticators. How practical is this and how will you enforce it to keep children apart. In the sixth instance children that rely on school feeding is another huge challenge. So please get real and stop pointing at e-learning, social distancing and masks as the natural solutions to save this academic year when the disparities of have and have not’s exist in the country that is considered the most unequal in the Globe. The have’s and the one’s pretending to have [whom there are many in SA’s thick belt of what makes for a middle class] must stop thinking SA is about them when they plan and promote things that wholly ignore the poor of which their own families are part. Suburbian life can be very deceiving for those who think they have made it. CNSR