By: Clyde Ramalaine The Grace Bible church leader Bishop Musa Sono’s latest conviction on the remuneration of musicians and singers opted to classify musicians and lead-worshippers under what he defines as equal to car-guards, who are also volunteers. The dialectic and visible tension remain what GBC and its leader use for a premise in departure point. I can see at least principle, process and methodology errors in his articulation.
On principle: Principles are informed by what type of entity the church is and what it has as its fundamental and ordinary base. By this standard, the church of Jesus Christ is an unusual organisation that must function in a democratic dispensation with for some an archaic Holy Writ. Yet believers of which I am one accepts the entire 66 books as God’s Word as breathed by His Holy Spirit and necessarily the history of mankind in relationship with the Christian God.
It is yet an entity that has 66 books defined in Old and New Testaments of descriptions as its Sacred Text defined in a canon as agreed much later than the churches birth. The Church, therefore, breathes in obedience to its sacred text as uniquely supreme. We then must ask when Bishop Sono speaks on this subject is he doing so from a biblical premise or an economic premise.? Following his statement carefully suggests the new ethos concluded one is arrived at solely on economic reasons since he alludes to the other daughter churches complaining about paying musicians. One involuntarily than must ask what the stance of the GBC leader have been had the daughter churches advanced a similar challenge on remuneration for its respective pastors? This shows the glaring contradictions of a suspect of using economics as a premise. If Grace Bible Church as its name leads is subjected to the dictates, instructions and Didache of the Christian Holy Writ then musicians and singers fall under the Old Testament Levitical designation, particularly since the Pastoral or Bishop, overseer role is a derivative and finds essence in that same Priestly function. In that sense musicians and singers are distinct from any group who volunteers that in their capacity be it in contributions of labour, time or money makes. We must not confuse volunteerism as a human philosophy and trait for a read-in biblical meaning without being respectful of the cardinal aspect of context. The Temple of Biblical Israel was built by volunteerism yet that didn’t alter the inscribe of how priests and Levites in service of the Temple were taken care off. I suggest Bishop Sono share what his church family his premise for a church because his entire argument does not assume or identify in the biblical dictate of the role place and designation of a Levitical Priesthood as advanced in historical and ontological footprint.
Secondly, Sono’s statement appears flawed in the process too. While we are not privy to the inner workings of Grace Bible Church meaning we not sure how the communicated process with the result of statement unfolded. It, however, appears that the general assembly was used to authorize an already taken decision. This raises the question of the business dimension of the church meaning at an operational level employing someone and deciding to change their contract to that of an assumed volunteerism dictate holds its ramifications that will not stand in the favour of the GBC church and leadership should any contracted musician decide to exercise their constitutional rights as explained in fair labour law practice.
Unfortunately, the Bishop had capitalist economics for his departure point which makes it a biblically unfounded and weak argument for the church as the body of Christ. While the New Testament is not as explicit as the Old Testament paying pastors and leaders is underscored in many of the Pauline writings. We must desist unilateral claims of volunteerism as churches when we simultaneously prognosticate the Sacred Text as the axis for governance in the Ekklesia. Perhaps the challenge for the GBC church is an assessment if it can afford staff. Perhaps if it accepts it can’t it may either trust God like all of us to supply or it may give it’s workers a severance package since it with this statement has broken both biblical and secular employment contract law. Finally musicians and worshippers that lead the congregation in Biblical setting resort under the Levitical order and is deserving of remuneration.