PORT ELIZABETH, January 21 – She speaks Bemba, French, English and Nyanja, she’s a renowned child journalist, child and women’s rights advocate and activist at the Media Network on Child Rights and Development. And on Tuesday, Natasha Mwansa, spoke passionately at the World Economic Forum about the need for governments and business leaders to give young people a seat at the table. “Young people are no longer just seen. Either partner with us or we will do it on our own … we have to find a way to have that inter-generational partnership,” the outspoken, clear and dynamic 18-year-old Zambian said. “We have energy, we have solutions. We need to collaborate.” She urged governments and communities to look at best practices and solutions from the past to find solutions to key socio-economic issues in their communities. She was sharing a panel with climate activists Greta Thunberg, Autumn Peltier and Salvador Gomez-Colon. A rising star, in 2012 and 2015, she was a debate champion. In 2015 she became the Child Rights ambassador for the Media Institute of Southern Africa. As part of the United Nations youth programme in Zambia, then only 14, Mwansa became a youth representative for the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA). She counts as one of her most significant achievements in her work for the UNFPA, her selection to represent the fund at the SADC Parliamentary’s first-ever Women’s Parliament in 2017. She sits on the African Union Commission’s Youth advisory Board and is the Accountability Monitor at Southern Africa HIV and Aids Dissemination Service. For her contribution to extraordinary work in promoting health globally, she received the World Health Organisation Global Award in Geneva, Switzerland, in May 2019. As an advocate and activist for women’s and children’s rights, Mwansa is making waves as she presses for young people to take radical action for change. At the WEF panel discussion on Tuesday, she called on young people to go beyond social networks to make their voices heard. “Generation Z is not as daring as it could be. We can be a bit louder. “We could be more on the scene. We can use platforms such as strikes. We need more action,” Mwansa said. – African News Agency (ANA)