By: Staff Reporter JOHANNESBURG- The ANC NYYT has on Wednesday, said that it is disgusted by the warrant of arrest issued against former President Jacob Zuma. This comes after judge Dhaya Pillay rejected the sick note for Military 1 Hospital and went ahead to issue the warrant of arrest. “This warrant of arrest is nothing but the continuous vilification that former President continues to be subjected to in this country. For more than a decade, the state has failed to prove beyond reasonable doubts that the former President is guilty of any crime,” said the ANC NYYT. “F.W De Clerk continues to roam around the streets of South Africa, parade like some Hero who took us to the promise land. De Clerk led the crime against humanity, had thousands of our people and revolutionaries killed in the hands of his government. He brutalized our people and left them with no dignity. To this day, there are families who do not know where their loved ones are, they were taken away and killed far from their homes, buried like dogs by the same De Clerk and his government. Red carpet and Courteous treatment is afforded to De Clerk. Today we see former President Zuma, hunted down like a serial killer which he is not, his sickness has been turned into a joke,” said the ANC NYYT. According to the ANC NYYT, there seem to be a mission to defocus people from real issues. The ANC NYYT further added: “The country’s economy is in shambles. The State Owned Entities are as good as dead. We have see a long list of judges from the highest to the lowest courts in this country accused of being in the pockets of White Monopoly Capital . No investigation was carried out as it relates to these allegations.” Furthermore, the ANC NYYT said that the people who should be focusing on reviving and fixing what is wrong with our country are focused on tactics to vilify and victimize Zuma. “When our courts that are meant to protect us and all human rights are the ones that vilify people, even at their weakest state of health, it’s rather sickening. This country cannot be turned into a friends like these sort of an arrangement and we keep quiet about it. For all the crimes that the white establishment has committed against humanity, it had to find an escape goat and Zuma became an easy target. Former President Zuma is only human like everyone of us. In your sober mind, you cannot think that a person who has suffered so much in his political life, at the age of Zuma cannot get sick. You cannot dismiss his sickness as some sort of a delaying tactic or refusal to attend the court case.,” said the ANC NYYT. According to the ANC NYYT, the imbeciles and lumpens behind the scenes masquerading as voice of reason and fighters of corruption are not far from being exposed. “Our movement is bleeding because people are so much entrenched into personal vendettas, that they will rather leave our people in darkness of nonsensical and unexplainable load shedding while they focus on destroying what is left of Zuma’s dignity.” The movement reitareiterate that the South African Judiciary has since turned itself into a public opinion arena. Its conduct is highly questionable, the freedom and the independence of the judiciary was not gained over a dish of sushi and a glass of wine. People died for this freedom. Our freedom was not free. “The warrant of arrest simply stand as a test to the people and we warn the judiciary and it’s friends. Do not threaten the peace of our country. Do not threaten the patience of our people. If you start fire, you are bound to see flames.” In conclusion, the movement called on the country, the members of the ANC and true leadership to defend the hard gains of democracy. “Today it’s Zuma tomorrow it may be another comrade. The truth is that even those who believe that they are the sweethearts of the white establishment today, they must know that they are only needed to deal with their fellow comrades today and when all our comrades are dealt with, the same white establishment will come for you. No one is safe. Not even the millionaire club of friends. Not even the poorest of the poor,” said the ANC NYYT. 