By: Sello Theletsane JOHANNESBURG- President Cyril Ramaphosa’s Special Envoy and former Cabinet minister Jeff Radebe allegedly abused his power and influence while serving as minister to give a top government job to his baby mama to avoid paying child maintenance. Africa News 24-7 can exclusively reveal that Radebe, who fathered a daughter with Onele Ludidi, who is now office manager in The Presidency 10 years ago while he was a cabinet minister. Both Radebe and Ramaphosa are married to billionaire mining magnate Patrice Motsepe’s sisters; Bridgette and Tshepo Motsepe respectively. Impeccable sources allege that Radebe, who was then minister of Justice and Constitutional Development, started paying monthly child maintenance of R5 000 to Ludidi until she complained years later, demanding R50 000 per month.  “By this time, Radebe was serving as Minister in The Presidency,” said the source. “The lady gave Jeff two options – either he paid her R50 000 per month or he used his influence and power to see to it that she is appointed an ambassador. The source said Radebe rejected both demands, and instead secured a job for Ludidi in The Presidency, where he was serving as minister. It is alleged that Radebe’s affair with Ludidi and his multiple other extramarital romantic relationships, out of which children were born, is what led to a breakdown in Radebe’s marriage to Bridgette Radebe, South Africa’s first black female mining entrepreneur. Africa News 24-7 can reveal that Radebe and his wife, who has since dumped the Radebe’s surname, and has officially resorted to her maiden surname are going through a divorce allegedly because of his adulterous affairs which Africa News 24 will reveal in its follow-up stories. It is not the first time Radebe is embroiled in extra-marital scandal. In 2017, his ambition to lead his political party, the ANC and that of occupying the country’s highest office was torpedoed by a text sex scandal and e-mail communication in which he asked for nude pictures of a then 29-year-old Union Buildings staffer, Siyasanga Mbambani. Radebe later apologised for the scandal, however the damage it had caused on his reputation and presidential campaign was so massive it left him with no option but to withdraw from the race to succeed Jacob Zuma as both leader of the ANC and the country. Africa News 24-7 sent Radebe and Ludidi a list of questions via SMS and WhatsApp. The pair failed to respond by yesterday’s (Saturday 9 May) 5pm deadline. A reminder was sent this morning (Sunday 10 May) to both Radebe and Ludidi who were informed that if they failed to respond by 10.30am deadline, Africa News 24-7 would be left with no option but to publish the story without their responses. They still failed to respond.  SEE QUESTIONS SENT TO MS LUDIDI BELOW: My name is Sello Theletsane, senior journalist at Africa News 24-7, an online publication based in Sandton. We are writing a story about your alleged romantic relationship with former Minister in the Presidency and the current Special Envoy Mr Jeff Radebe. May you kindly respond to the questions below before Saturday (9 MAY2020) 5pm. Please note that the story is earmarked to go live on Sunday 10 May 2020. 1. Can you confirm if you were at some stage romantically involved with Mr Radebe? 2. If, so are you still dating? 3. Can you confirm if you are still employed by the Presidency, if so what’s your designation? 4. It has been brought to our attention that Mr Radebe is the father of your daughter. Can you confirm this? 5. It is alleged that you at some stage demanded R50 000 monthly child maintenance from Mr Radebe or alternatively an ambassadorial position. Can you confirm this? 6. It is alleged that Mr Radebe shot down both your demands and instead got you a job in the Presidency where he was serving as the Minister. Can you confirm this? 7. Did you apply for your current government position and were you interviewed for the post? 8. If you applied and were interviewed for the position, can you provide us with proof? 9. Mr Radebe and his estranged wife are currently going through a divorce. It is alleged his multiple extra-marital affairs, including one with you, led to the breakdown of the marriage. What’s your comment on this?  SEE QUESTIONS SENT TO MR RADEBE BELOW: My name is Sello Theletsane, senior journalist at Africa News 24-7, an online publication based in Sandton. We are writing a story about your alleged romantic relationship with a government employee, Ms Onele Ludidi who works in The Presidency. May you kindly respond to the questions below before Saturday 5pm. Please note that the story is earmarked to go live on Sunday 10 May 2020. 1. Can you confirm if you were at some stage romantically involved with Ms Onele Ludidi? 2. If, so are you still dating? 3. It has been brought to our attention that you are the father of Ms Ludidi’s daughter. Can you confirm this? 4. It is alleged that she at some stage she demanded R50 000 monthly child maintenance from you, or alternatively an ambassadorial position. Can you confirm this? 5, It is alleged that you shot down both Ms Ludidi’s demands and instead got her a job in the Presidency where you were serving as the Minister. Can you confirm this? 6. If it is true that you had a romantic relationship with Ms Ludidi and played a role in getting her a job in The Presidency at the time when you were serving as Minister in The Presidency, is this not corruption? 7. If you are the father of Ms Ludidi’s daughter, and it’s true that you secured her a job in The Presidency, would you agree that this is a blatant abuse of public resources by yourself which your squandered to help you pay for child maintenance? 8. You and your estranged wife, Ms Bridgette Motsepe are currently going through a divorce. It is alleged you fathering several kids out of wedlock, and your multiple extra-marital affairs, including one with Ms Ludidi, led to the breakdown of the marriage. What’s your comment on this?  Africa News 24-7 sent questions to Radebe’s estranged wife. She too did not respond. When she was called on her mobile, she didn’t answer calls and later blocked this reporter.