By: Marcus Wendell Jacobs Perspectives on SA’s COVID-19, Round 5, on how RamaPromises gets his ‘butt’ kicked by Zuma during Lockdown It appears as though President Ramaphosa seeks to turn the COVID-19 occasion into a personal recovery-opportunity. It is interesting to see how he bobs and weaves as he captivates his captive audience in such a convincing and persuasive manner. He is never out of his corner on time to address the nation, but when the mega-wealthy smooth operator emerges, he uses his companionable and tactful personality to good effect. Ramaphosa’s inflated yet refined speech is complemented by his impressive and stately tone, which in turn is measured with the right inflections, the right promises and the right humour. Critical phrases in his speech somehow always seem to lead one to postulate and formulate alternate observations. Here are three examples from Ramaphosa’s, ‘2020 Lockdown Freedom Day Speech’. Critical Phrase 1: “The promise we made on the 27th of April 1994 can no longer be deferred…” Alternate Observation: “We got away with broken promises for 26 years…”. Critical Phrase 2: “We find ourselves engaged in a struggle that has thrown into sharp focus the poverty and inequality that still defines our society…” Alternate Observation: “When we weigh our wealth against that of the ‘current liberated disadvantaged’, we grasp that we have failed the people by the considerable burden of poverty and inequality.” Critical Phrase 3: “This is the time when we should actively work to build a fair and just country.” Alternate Observation: “Even though the personal gain that we actively worked for has destroyed the economy and infrastructure, we expect every broke, bankrupt, loadshedded and locked-down citizen to trust us from now onward to be fair and just”. The question that cannot be quarantined is, “Why is Ramaphosa fixated about forgetting the past? In his National Freedom Day Speech, he said, “The true lessons of this experience is … the ability to turn this crisis into an opportunity to invest in a new society, a new consciousness and a new economy …”. To me it sounds like the President is covertly petitioning us to forget the past, overlook and ignore the past misdemeanours, transgressions, crimes and promises, and take up a new challenge after Lockdown. What happened to the ‘New Dawn? I am disillusioned because I always thought that Cyril was going to be the Ray-‘maphosa’ (energetic executive) of light and hope for South Africa. A few days after the National Assembly voting Cyril Ramaphosa in as the fifth State President of South Africa, I concluded my book ‘Living Solutions’ with these words, “I cannot help but sense that our country remains in darkness. The term coined by President Ramaphosa is ‘New Dawn’. I have seen too many dawns. A ‘New Dawn’ should bring the brightness and enthusiasm of a new day. A ‘New Dawn’ requires us to think anew and act anew. A ‘New Dawn’ requires a renewed mind that perceives new realities and responds in new ways. It only constitutes a ‘New Dawn’ if we don’t continue stumbling in the dark.
If we do not rise with the ‘New Dawn’, we will lose our chance, perhaps our last hope, to set our country economically free to restore the imbalances of the past, so that we can progress beyond any limitation”. This was two years ago. It seems as though the current pandemic offers Ramaphosa; a final gasp to disinfect the nation of the pandemonium of a corrupt state, to sanitize it of past injustices, to emancipate a nation locked-down with deep inequalities, including a ruined infra-structure with poor service delivery. It is time for the President to deep clean the, “stain on our national conscience”. Will he rise with the occasion? “The ban on the sale of cigarettes will be lifted”, he promised, but Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma’s power-punches has him on the ropes once again.
Ramaphosa is a man of empty promises, and on Freedom Day 2020, he made the costliest promise of his career. He promised that, “No man, no woman or child will go hungry, because they will have the means to earn an income”.
President Ramaphosa, I truly hope that you will do the most difficult yet honourable thing. Revisit your divinely-inspired vision of a ‘New Dawn’! Renaissance demands the execution of the old life!
It might be a good thing for you to say, like Robin Cavendish, “I accept the risk of dying (being knocked down) because I don’t want to just survive, so that I can truly live. You have the power to open the gates and set the people free.”