Dear Comrades, We write to you as a collective of concerned members of the African National Congress from various branches in Kwa Zulu Natal to request you as the provincial leadership of the ANC in Kwa Zulu Natal to convene a special congress in accordance with the powers of members under Rule 5.1.5 of the Constitution of the ANC. As members of the organization, we would like to publicly engage certain leaders from this province whom we know to be leading activities aimed at eliminating other comrades from the organization using organs of state. We have concrete evidence of the existence of a grouping of leaders that has been secretly approaching activists in the province for the purposes of using them to profile and promote Cyril Ramaphosa in Kwa Zulu Natal while discrediting all those perceived to be supporters of President Zuma. What is most disturbing and outrageous in all of this, is their plan to have President Zuma expelled from the ANC. We name some of these leaders and allude to some of their activities in this letter. As will be apparent, the circumstances dictate that a special congress be convened urgently for these comrades to be confronted with this evidence. The comrades we know with certainty to be involved as stated above, include Senzo Mchunu, James Nxumalo, Chris Ndlela, Peggy Nkonyeni and Zweli Mkhize. It is our intention to present these comrades with concrete proof of meetings they have held in various locations in Kwa Zulu Natal such as Pietermaritzburg and Empangeni where they have met to plot and conspire against other comrades. In addition, we have in our possession phone records and text messages that show how they have been actively recruiting certain comrades to be part of their clandestine cabal. We all know that the recent announcement by Ramaphosa to the effect that all members charged with corruption or facing similar allegations would have to step aside from official positions is a nefarious scheme by Ramaphosa and his White Monopoly Capital handlers to lynch their political opponents within the ANC. It is tragic that Ramaphosa as the most celebrated “drafter” of the Constitution is now the one leading the egregious violation of the right to presumption of innocence protected by Section 35(3)(h) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. We all know that the recent flurry of arrests and those that will happen in the coming weeks are all part of an orchestrated plot to eliminate individuals that are feared to be obstacles to Ramaphosa’s re-election for a second term. Despite the recent speculation, we know that the Secretary General, comrade Ace Magashule, is to be arrested by December 2020 and he will be forced into stepping aside. We know of the continuous meetings Ramaphosa has been having with the head of the National Prosecuting Authority to stage manage the arrest of comrade Ace Magashule. These are no different than those that were held by Leonard McCarthy and Bulelani Ngcuka to stage the arrest of President Zuma back then. Also on the list of persons to be eliminated through similar tactics are the names of comrades such as Nomvula Mokonyane, Lindiwe Zulu, Bathabile Dlamini, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and David Mabuza. We also now know that the ultimate plan is aimed at getting President Zuma to be expelled from the ANC when he refuses to resign from the party when asked to do so on account of the preconceived criminal charges he will face at the conclusion of Zondo Commission. As an organization we are back to the era where organs of state are being used to eliminate political adversaries in the ANC. Nobody can explain why Duduzane Zuma was shackled in chains when he was arrested in July 2018. Nobody can explain how all the recent arrests all coincide with events at the Zondo Commission as we have seen with Vincent Smith, Edwin Sodi and others. Vincent Smith is charged with corruption for allegedly accepting money from Bosasa. Ramaphosa also accepted no less than R500 000 from Bosasa, why hasn’t he stepped aside to clear his name? The Public Protector found that there is a prima facie case of money laundering against Ramaphosa, why hasn’t he stepped aside to clear his name? There is clear evidence of the CR17 campaign bribing delegates at Nasrec, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? When is Ramaphosa subjecting himself to the scrutiny of the Integrity Commission as he said he would? Ramaphosa’s spokesperson is at the center of Covid-19 PPE corruption allegations, she still has not been fired after all these months. Ramaphosa’s son, is deeply implicated in Covid-19 tender corruption, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Ramaphosa’s company Shanduka, was in a venture with Glencore that supplied overpriced coal to Eskom, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Ramaphosa is also implicated in the sale of Optimum Coal mine to Tegeta by Glencore, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? CR17 investors such as Seriti Resources have been awarded major coal contracts at Eskom, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Another of the many B-BBEE non-compliant White Monopoly Capital investors of CR17, Balwin Properties, has been rewarded with a R30billion infrastructure project that will be harvesting government’s housing subsidies as a return on investment for their R30million invested in the CR17 campaign. We have just seen Steve Brookes of Balwin Properties bragging on television of how he was called by Ramaphosa himself to do the Public-Private Partnership at Mooikloof. Why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Is that not the conduct that all at the Zondo Commission attempt to allege against President Zuma? Ramaphosa has stated in court papers that he had no powers to discipline ministers when he was defying the Public Protector when told to take action against Pravin Gordhan but he inexplicably had these powers when he acted against Stella Ndabeni Abrahams and Nosiviwe Maphisa-Nqakula. We are still shocked at how the ANC president censured and condemned ANC leaders that were doing organizational work in Zimbabwe when he was part of the decision for them to go there. It however comes as no surprise as Ramaphosa has already told entire membership to hang their heads in shame as they are all accused of corruption by him and his White Monopoly Capital handlers in Stellenbosch. In addition, there are multiple lawsuits in our courts implicating Ramaphosa in the
Marikana massacre, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Ramaphosa’s companies such as Bidvest have made billions from government tenders and state-owned enterprises even in the time that Ramaphosa was deputy president of the country, why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Ramaphosa was elected deputy president of the ANC in December 2012 but continued to serve on the board of Bidvest until June 2013. There has never been a more glaring conflict of interest and visibly corrupt arrangement between a person in the ANC and a private company. Why hasn’t Ramaphosa stepped aside to clear his name? Bidvest is the biggest service provider in all of government yet there hasn’t been a single thing said about them at the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture. Is it because all things Ramaphosa are excluded from this commission? Or is it because Ramaphosa and Zondo now meet regularly in private? As we speak, we have a list of senior people that have been in government and SOE’s that are being prevented from testifying at the Zondo Commission because they implicate Ramaphosa in their statements. The Zondo Commission has over its existence conspicuously and inexplicably overlooked white companies like KPMG and McKinsey that have publicly admitted their corrupt activities in the Estina Dairy Project and Eskom respectively. Evidence about the unlawful activities of law firms like Werksmans at SARS and PRASA is removed by evidence leaders at the commission on the grounds that “it falls outside the terms of reference of the commission” when mentioned by witnesses in their statements. The White Monopoly Capital mafia in Naspers, has literally told Zondo to go play with himself. Pravin Gordhan has told him to do the same and yet Zondo has issued an unwarranted subpoena against President Zuma. It therefore comes as no surprise that the Zondo Commission is the failed project that it is because it has always been a kangaroo court intended for President Zuma as is evidenced by Zondo calling a special press conference to subpoena President Zuma while ensuring that junior white advocates who are evidence leaders are being paid more money than their more senior black colleagues. At this point it is not even worth mentioning that the majority of the Zondo Commission’s investigators are ex Special Branch operatives and apartheid police. When Ramaphosa eventually finds it within himself to step aside, we also expect him to take the organization into his confidence over how he became an overnight billionaire as well as his personal definition of state capture. We are concerned at how the comrades doing Ramaphosa’s bidding do this fully knowing that Ramaphosa is a royal puppet and stooge of White Monopoly Capital. It is no secret that Ramaphosa worked as a police informer during apartheid. On the day Ramaphosa was supposedly elected ANC president, one Paul O’Sullivan was on the radio bragging that he had trained Ramaphosa as a police reservist of the apartheid police and awarded
“Constable” Ramaphosa the award of “most conscientious student” after Ramaphosa would fly from London to attend a single class and fly back to London the very next day. (Mosiuoa Lekota raised the issue of Ramaphosa’s dealings with the Special
Branch in parliament and the CR17 funded and De Klerk worshiping MP’s squashed it). Ramaphosa was at the same time being used by White Monopoly Capital to infiltrate the ANC through the trade union formed by the Oppenheimers. He continues to be their agent in the scheme to collapse the ANC to a lame duck majority party that can only rule through coalitions with the DA. Anybody in the ANC who still needs convincing on that point lacks the requisite political consciousness to be an ANC member. That person belongs to the group of people who see nothing wrong with the fact that in November 2017, Ramaphosa proved he really was an ANC outsider when launched his “New Deal” campaign in Soweto. He was accompanied by his White Monopoly Capital handlers such as Stephen Koseff of Investec, Colin Coleman of Goldman Sachs and Johan Burger of First Rand who had come to witness their trojan horse and agent in action. It is the same group of people who see nothing wrong with the fact that Ramaphosa has not told the organization what he did with the more than R1billion he received from the White Monopoly Capital investors of the CR17 campaign. It is the same group of people who failed to see the sell-out in Ramaphosa when he was the keynote speaker at the Centenary Celebration of the Broederbond in July 2018. In his speech, half of which was in Afrikaans, he contradicted a key 54th National Conference resolution when he assured those boers that their stolen land would never be expropriated. It is the same group of people who fail to see the sellout in Ramaphosa when he and Pravin Gordhan have removed all black executives from state owned enterprises and replaced them with boers and Indians. As a liberation movement, we should be extremely bothered about having a president who hangs out at boer auctions dressed in boere khakhis when our people have no land. As a liberation movement we should be in tears over having a president who lacks self respect to the point of parading in military uniform as a commander when he has never been a soldier. The only image we have of Ramaphosa in combat is that of the tragic day eBisho in September 1992, when comrades had to hold Ramaphosa by the hand like a little child to get him to safety. We will however deal with the Ramaphosa issue at the NGC. For now, we ask that the Kwa Zulu Natal PEC convene a special congress for the membership to ask questions about the activities of comrades Senzo Mchunu, James Nxumalo, Chris Ndlela, Peggy Nkonyeni and Zweli Mkhize. The situation is extremely grave for the ANC and warrants this special congress as a matter of urgency. A refusal or failure by the PEC to convene this congress will leave us as the branches with no choice but to invoke our powers as branches to remove the entire provincial leadership. We expect a public response to this letter within 10 days. Yours in struggle,
B Ntethe – Sundumbili, Mandeni
On behalf of 10 signatories